---
layout: page
tags: chapitre

eleventyNavigation:
  key: Conclusion
  order: 7
---

## Conclusion

In this publication we have tried to specify the pedagogical positions in our respective schools, but also to explain the ways in which this experience of international collaboration has challenged them. The present document is therefore a hybrid object, composed of testimonies, reports, theoretical texts, thoughts and various remarks, which are representative of the diversity of methods and approaches that have been convened for this project.
In order to structure these few conclusive notes, we propose to resume the most salient elements: our perspective on collaborative tools, the positive contrast between the teaching methods of the schools involved in the DTCC project, the importance of IRL meetings and the pedagogical paths that are opening up as a result of this collaboration.

The DTCC project as a whole, focused on the issue of digital tools for creative collaboration (at a distance or not). From the ESADSE's point of view, we wanted to seize this opportunity to feed a critical work already begun, on replacing the dominant tools in our art and design schools, such as the Adobe suite and the communication, project management and creative tools developed by the GAMAM companies. This pedagogical positioning linked to a "digital writing" and to training in author practices, encourages ESADSE students to think critically – especially on ecological and social issues, as well as on the governance and data security ones – regarding their projects and the tools used to implement them. We thought these questions, which also run through the pedagogy of the three partner schools (EKA, HFG and EASDSE), were at the very heart of the subject of Digital Tools for Creative Collaboration. However, the changes we wanted to bring at the scale of our three schools did not happen.  This was a node of disagreement between the project partners, which revealed our differences in positioning while being rich in learning. The question of tools is not as consensual as we might have thought, and our collaborative experience confirms that the choice of tools is above all cultural, ideological and even political. We therefore had to take the time to meet online and offline in order to map out the contours of the project, placing the emphasis on the notion of collaboration – the one that was taking place between us becoming a case study – rather than on the question of the collaboration tools.

We thus collaborated using the tools we had in common, prioritizing simplicity of use and relegating to the background, the question of our critical positioning towards those tools. With this in mind, apart from a shared Wiki that was created especially for the occasion – and is at the basis of this publication – we have organized our remote collaboration around generic communication tools such as Zoom, Slack, Miro and our schools' respective email applications. Although we knew that this project was not going to result in any major changes in our schools' working habits, it has opened a collective critical reflection on the tools we are already using, examined under the scope of their collaborative effectiveness. This led to some strong positions being taken by our students and some interesting proposals coming from them, for new tools or new features to be added to improve online collaborations. 

To summarize, having noted that the collaboration tools we use are mostly communication rather than collective creation tools (apart from software such as Figma or Penpot which are specialized tools on productivity tasks) it became clear that collaborative digital creation tools have yet to be invented, hence the usefulness of building *ourcollaborative.tools*, a catalogue not of existing "solutions" but of singular and alternative projects enabling creative processes to be updated outside the field of industry.

It should also be noted that from a pedagogical point of view, the IRL workshop format confirmed its relevance, which explains the part we have devoted to it in this publication. In particular, the organization of working groups – systematically including students from each school in each group – helped to develop their sense of working together. The effort that was made to switch perspectives and find areas for mutual understanding showed just how professionalizing this workshop approach can be. The diversity of the spaces and of the proposals that have emerged, demonstrate that this format of teaching remains incredibly fertile, provided that the effort to document its results is respected. The setting up of a wiki has allowed to some extent, to obtain faithful documentation to leave a trace of these activities. In addition to this wiki, the students' interviews – which we have chosen to present in the future DTCC exhibitions – are a key element of this archive and accurately attest to what has been at stake for them during these teamwork moments.

Finally and in this continuity, it is clear that the collaborative value of digital tools, especially in the creative field, does not replace the direct interaction of a physical encounter. If collaborative tools are quite effective in a productivity framework within a highly planned project logic, because of their strict digital framework (interface, screen, etc.) they do not (yet) succeed in convening an essential part – but one that is very difficult to simulate digitally! – of collaboration: meeting others, discovering other cultures and ways of understanding the world, conviviality and being "contextualized" from your usual workplace. This may seem obvious at the end of such a project, but putting it to the test has clearly shown that creation originates from a much wider and rich set than the simple software framework of a multi-user interface. This is therefore the true value of an ERASMUS-supported project such as this one: in addition to the various outcomes achieved, it is surprisingly the "extras" to the work sessions, such as cultural visits, friendly encounters and discussions outside meetings, that have greatly participated in forging a mental space specific to creation.

As students and supervisors can attest, the various experiences we had, transformed our creative approaches and thus modified our productions, enriched with broader pedagogical and professional methods than those usually adopted in our respective countries. This clearly shows the fertility of the European territory, which, by its differences but also its points of encounter, forces to think of collaboration as an exercise in physical and intellectual mobility, cultural and formal discoveries and diversity of approaches, inviting to be in a movement rather than to remain static.

