---
layout: page
tags: chapitre

eleventyNavigation:
  key: Conclusion
  order: 7
---

## Conclusion

In this publication, we have aimed to specify the pedagogical positions
in our respective schools while also explaining how the experience of
international collaboration has challenged them. The document at hand is
a hybrid object, comprising testimonies, reports, theoretical texts,
thoughts, and various remarks that reflect the diverse methods and
approaches brought together for this project. To structure these
concluding notes, we propose to highlight the most salient elements: our
perspective on collaborative tools, the positive contrast between the
teaching methods of the schools involved in the DTCC project, the
significance of in-person meetings, and the pedagogical paths that have
emerged as a result of this collaboration.

The DTCC project as a whole has been centered around the topic of
digital tools for creative collaboration, whether conducted remotely or
in-person. From the perspective of ESADSE, we saw this as an opportunity
to further our ongoing critical work on the replacement of dominant
tools in art and design schools, such as the Adobe suite and the
communication, project management, and creative tools developed by GAMAM
companies. This pedagogical approach, which emphasizes \"digital
writing\" and authorial practices, encourages ESADSE students to think
critically about various aspects, including ecological and social
issues, as well as governance and data security concerns, in relation to
their projects and the tools they employ to realize them.We believed
that these questions, which are central to the pedagogy of the three
partner schools (EKA, HFG, and ESADSE), were at the core of the subject
of Digital Tools for Creative Collaboration. However, the desired
changes we aimed to implement across our respective schools did not
materialize. This discrepancy became a point of disagreement among the
project partners, highlighting our divergent positions but also
providing valuable learning experiences. The question of tools proved to
be less consensual than initially anticipated, and our collaborative
experience reaffirmed that the choice of tools is primarily influenced
by cultural, ideological, and even political factors. Consequently, we
had to invest time in both online and offline meetings to delineate the
project\'s scope, placing greater emphasis on the notion of
collaboration itself, which became a case study for us, rather than
solely focusing on the question of collaboration tools.

In our collaboration, we relied on the tools that we had in common,
placing a higher priority on usability rather than critically examining
our stance towards those tools. In light of this approach, apart from a
shared Wiki that was created for this project and serves as the
foundation of this publication, our remote collaboration was organized
using widely-used communication tools such as Zoom, Slack, Miro, and the
email applications provided by our respective schools. While we were
aware that this project wouldn\'t bring about significant changes in our
schools\' established practices, it did spark a collective and critical
reflection on the tools we already employ, with a focus on their
effectiveness in fostering collaboration. This process resulted in our
students taking strong positions and presenting intriguing proposals for
new tools or features that could enhance online collaborations.

In summary, we have recognized that the tools we currently use for
collaboration are primarily communication-oriented, with only a few
specialized productivity tools like Figma or Penpot catering to
collective creation. This realization has made it evident that there is
still a need for collaborative digital creation tools to be developed.
Hence, the significance of our initiative to build
ourcollaborative.tools, a catalog that showcases unique and alternative
projects fostering creative processes beyond the field of industry,
rather than offering pre-existing \"solutions.\"

It is worth mentioning that, from a pedagogical standpoint, the
in-person workshop format has reaffirmed its relevance, which is why we
have dedicated a significant portion of this publication to it. In
particular, the formation of working groups, intentionally including
students from each school in every group, has played a vital role in
fostering a sense of collaboration among them. The deliberate effort to
exchange perspectives and seek common ground has demonstrated the
professionalizing impact of this workshop approach. The diversity of
spaces and the range of proposals that have emerged highlight the
remarkable fertility of this teaching format, as long as there is a
commitment to documenting its outcomes. The establishment of a wiki has
provided a means to capture and preserve the activities in a faithful
manner. Alongside the wiki, the interviews conducted with the students
-- which we have chosen to present in future DTCC exhibitions -- serve
as a crucial component of this archive, providing an authentic testimony
to the significance of these collaborative moments for the students
involved.

In continuation, it is evident that the collaborative value of digital
tools, particularly in the creative field, cannot fully replace the
direct interaction of physical encounters. While collaborative tools
prove to be quite effective in a productivity-driven context with
well-defined project goals, their inherent digital nature (interface,
screens, etc.) currently falls short of replicating an essential aspect
of collaboration: the physical presence. The act of meeting others,
experiencing different cultures and perspectives, fostering
conviviality, and being \"contextualized\" beyond one\'s usual workplace
are elements that are challenging to simulate digitally. Hence, despite
the advantages of digital collaboration, there remains an irreplaceable
value in face-to-face interactions. At the conclusion of such a project,
it may appear self-evident, but putting it to the test has revealed that
creation springs forth from a broader and richer context than the mere
software framework of a multi-user interface. This realization
underscores the true value of an ERASMUS-supported project like ours.
Beyond the tangible outcomes achieved, it is the \"extras\" accompanying
the work sessions that have played a significant role in shaping a
mental space specific to creation. Cultural visits, friendly encounters,
and discussions outside of formal meetings have contributed greatly to
this process.

As affirmed by both students and supervisors, the diverse experiences we
encountered during this project have transformed our creative approaches
and consequently shaped our productions. Our work has become enriched by
embracing pedagogical and professional methods that extend beyond the
conventional practices of our respective countries. This clearly shows
the richness of the European territory, which, through its differences
and points of convergence, compels us to view collaboration as an
exercise in physical and intellectual mobility. It encourages us to
embark on a journey of cultural and formal discoveries while embracing
diverse approaches. In this dynamic context, remaining static is not an
option; instead, we are invited to be in constant motion.
