---
layout: page
tags: article
title: Designing tools
url: '/designing-tools-for-creative-collaboration/'

eleventyNavigation:
  key: Appropriating to share better
  parent: Designing Tools for Creative Collaboration
  order: 3
---

## Appropriating to share better: Digital Tools for Design Collaboration

### Nolwenn MAUDET, Associate Professor in Design, University of Strasbourg

## Abstract

Appropriating to share better: This seemingly paradoxical dual movement
lies at the heart of tool production practices in contemporary design
and opens up a redefinition of design: farewell to the creation of
unique, controlled, and definitive forms and welcome to the fabrication
of infinite potentialities to be explored in collaboration. And if these
collaborative tools proudly brandish their openness as a standard, it's
often rather from their functional closure that the creation of singular
and original forms is born. By offering a narrow infinity of
possibilities to be explored in collaboration.

### Article plan

1.  Introduction: How the appropriation of programming by graphic
    designers has connected tools and collaborations
2.  Redefining the profession: How collaborative tools revolutionize
    design by shifting from the creation of unique, finalized forms to
    an endless factory of possibilities to be explored through
    collaboration
3.  Open-Closed: How do collaborative tools bring into play limits that
    promote diversity of forms
4.  Different nuances of collaboration: In what ways do various forms of
    collaboration manifest themselves in tools?

### Introduction

#### Many hands make light work

Back in 2011, Andrew Blauvelt, a graphic designer and design theorist,
concluded that the relationship between graphic design and technology
has reached a new phase of maturity, redefining design that encompasses
the creation of new tools that enable others to practice design.[^1]
This evolution has been built through gradual adoption of the power of
computers, more specifically of programming: "We have to learn how to
create tools ourselves. After all, that's what computers are about: a
tool for creating tools."[^2] The ability of designers to produce their
own tools has enhanced a transformation of practices that takes the form
of a seemingly paradoxical double movement: appropriating to share
better.

For designers, taking ownership of their tool production is a way of
liberating themselves and asserting their independence against the
monopolistic position that Adobe holds over the tools of the design
profession. This claim sometimes even goes as far as advocating for a
level of autonomy close to self-sufficiency or even autarchy, which
requires a deep understanding and complete mastery of the technical
chain, usually necessitating the acquisition of programming skills.

However, this autarkic approach to appropriation is accompanied by a
strong desire for sharing, openness, collaboration and versatility,
whether between designers, with clients or with the public. This
fruitful duality is well summarized by Anthony Masure when he speaks
about the work of the collective OSP: "Many hands make light work[^3],"
and it is frequently affirmed and displayed in the discourse of
designers themselves. But what tools are we talking about? And what kind
of collaborations? What are their effects on design practices and
outputs?

1.  Redefining the profession: How collaborative tools revolutionize
    design by shifting from the creation of unique, finalized forms to
    an endless factory of possibilities to be explored through
    collaboration

The act of developing collaborative tools for production in design
shifts the focus from creating final objects or forms to creating tools
that are inherently collaborative in nature. Beyond digital realms, we
observe the same inclination among designers to produce tools, sometimes
even on paper, that will be used by others to create the final forms.
Why is there such an enthusiasm among designers for tool production? I
believe it's a matter of designers reappropriating a technical expertise
that distinguishes them from those who can "only use" traditional
digital tools, which have become accessible and usable by everyone. "At
the end of the day, if what you produce can be done by anyone with a
computer, why would we need a designer? In other words, we adopt the
business language and ask: as a designer, what is your added
value?[^4]\"

Today, the true power lies less in the production of forms, which has
become widely accessible to everyone, and more in the creation of tools
that will then structure the production of these forms. Thus, while the
designer seemingly relinquishes their prerogatives over forms, they
actually retain the right to define their outlines and conditions, the
realm of latent possibilities. Incidentally, developing tools shifts
designer's work by requiring additional skills and prompting new
questions: How can this tool be made usable by non-programmers? How can
it be easily reappropriated/readopted by those who know how to program?
How can the tool be maintained, nurtured and evolved? These are new
areas of expertise that disrupt the fundamentals of the profession.

In terms of the produced forms, the development of tools promotes
engendering of multiples responses to each problem. Unique and
definitive forms are no longer the sole focus, as developing tools
implies their repeated use by multiple individuals. Collaborative tools
usually enable the creation of a multitude of forms, serving as a series
of variations around a single theme. This possibility aligns well with
the nature of the digital technology. It doesn't cost more to produce
and display an infinite number of different forms online. On the
contrary, the attention economy demands a constant abundance of content
to be shared on social networks.

1.  Open-Closed: How do collaborative tools bring into play limits that
    promote diversity of forms

Historically, the digitization of design tools has led to their
universalization. Global monopolies have emerged around a few companies
that produce software with a universal and all-encompassing purpose.
Whether in Japan, South Africa, or Europe, we now design using the same
tools. Regardless of the project, context or designer, we can always use
the same software because they promise -theoretically- to enable the
creation of all possible forms.

On the contrary, many digital tools produced by designers are small,
highly distinctive tools, often custom-made or derived from an existing
base and adapted to a new context. These tools are distinctive not only
because they may become irrelevant and unusable outside of their
context, but also because they typically have a much narrower range of
formal capabilities. Very often, collaborative digital tools introduce a
certain number of constraints and provide a limited number of parameters
that can then be varied. By offering a narrow infinity of possibilities
to explore, the tools created by designers defy the infinite potential
of universalist software, which has often fueled the homogenization of
productions. This is precisely because the restriction or explicit
channeling of possibilities enables the production of a multitude of
different proposals while ensuring a certain graphic coherence. It is
also this closure that allows for the production of unique forms that
are always contextualized and, therefore, constantly renewed. Taken
individually, these tools often have a recognizable aesthetic, a sense
of déjà vu, but it is through their multiplication that closed tools can
claim a certain formal openness in the form of contextual diversity.

The interest in producing closed tools is not solely limited to the
formal aspect. The more tools have a universal purpose and a large,
permanent user base, the more attention, maintenance, bugfix, progress,
and feature additions will be required in order to meet new emerging
needs. Restricting the possibilities and staying within the context
allows designer to free themselves from these maintenance issues and
align the tool production with a more traditional process of creation:
one project equals one tool, just as we used to have one project equals
one form or a series of forms. Once the project is completed, it can be
archived, and one can move on to the next. The traditional lifecycle of
tools, especially digital ones, is often different, and if we wish for
the renewal of a tool, limiting it also allows a necessary end of cycle.
Even though they are formally closed, each tool retains an inherent
openness that allows those with programming skills to modify them,
enabling potential adaptations to different contexts. This process
reopens a new realm of possibilities that is simultaneously infinite and
constrained. However, the open nature of coding, should not hide the
fact that it is rarely sufficient for genuine sharing and true
appropriation to happen.

1.   Different nuances of collaboration: In what ways do various forms
    of collaboration manifest themselves in tools?

Creating tools only makes sense if others use them. Considering tools
from a collaborative perspective is therefore evident, and this
relationship has notably emerged in design thanks to the ethics of
open-source software, which is based on sharing. Participation has been
a part of art and design for a long time, dating back to historically
marginalized and activist practices such as Scandinavian participatory
design. This approach advocated for a political stance in designing
digital tools, involving collaboration with workers and challenging
employers[^5]. Nowadays, the demand for collaboration with the public
has become ubiquitous in design[^6] and is advocated as a mode of action
by many designers. Relying on collaboration helps to avoid definitive
proposals, which are sometimes perceived as too assertive, undemocratic,
and therefore lacking legitimacy. It also allows designers to free
themselves from the responsibility of form, because for designers who
produce tools or collaboration protocols, "forms are not the subject of
their concerns and discourse[^7]."

But what kind of collaboration are we talking about? There are several
ways to collaborate, ranging from contribution to cooperation, sharing,
participation and perhaps even exploitation. The development of digital
tools in design today presents at least two distinct aspects, as the
collaboration between designers and developers differs significantly
from the collaboration aimed at the general public.

We'll begin with collaboration between designers. Within the ecosystem
of designer-tool producers, many collectives can be found where
collaborative tools are used to facilitate collaborative work. Either
designers collaborate in the creation process of tools, or some develop
them for others to utilize. More widely, for some tools with greater
ambitions, such as paged.js library, communities of designers are
formed, who are often both users and contributors. Collaboration between
designers can also take the form of variation or forking. In this case,
the designer leaves open the possibility for others to take up, develop,
or adapt their work. Also in this case, we're talking about adapting
practices from programming culture, even though, when it comes to
variation based on existing work, one can draw a connection with older
practices such as remakes and variations that are widely used in
typography, for example[^8]. What is also new perhaps is that designers
today explicitly call for an appropriation of their work and often seek
to facilitate it through documentation. However, these forms of
collaboration are only accessible to a small elite of designers as they
require programming skills that are far from being democratized.

The second type of collaboration is the participation of the "public" in
the creation process. Rather than true collaboration, the term commonly
used in this case is participation, which extends far beyond the sphere
of digital tools in the field of design. Yann Aucompte observes this
phenomenon in certain forms of exhibition, for example: "Attending to
exhibitions is an active contribution by the public, as they, along with
the graphic designer, seek to sharpen a critical culture \[...\] The
exhibition is seen as a space for the public's engagement and
participation. The spectator of this kind of exhibition is not passive;
they contribute to the creation of a collective critical culture[^9]."
When we talk about participation, we refer to inclusion in a process of
creation, but we immediately grasp the asymmetry that exists between
stakeholders. In this context, the designer becomes "a producer or
orchestrator of frameworks, systems and actions that allow design to
exist. They have lost their traditional role as the sole creator of the
work; this role has been usurped by \"contributors,\" sometimes
numbering in the thousands[^10]. This type of participation is sometimes
aimed at the tool\'s client and offers them a certain level of autonomy,
for example, by allowing them to create variations of visuals by
manipulating the parameter(s) provided in the software. Compared to the
active and egalitarian collaboration between designer-programmers,
public participation generally takes the form of a more limited
involvement, utilizing the tool through a few predetermined actions that
enable the exploration of the space of possible formal variations. The
different proposals created are usually placed and presented at the same
level because it is their abundance that makes sense, rather than each
individual contribution being taken separately. This participation is
also time-limited, taking the form of workshops or guided performances.
This form of collaboration mediated by the tool has its own logic
because an audience confronted with a new creative tool cannot be
instantly trained in design practice or spend hours mastering a tool
that they will often only use once. Supervising and supporting usage
through workshops also alleviate some of the tedious work involved in
designing a long-term digital tool, which requires meticulous
fine-tuning of every ergonomic detail to facilitate independent learning
and eliminate bugs.

However, it is necessary to question what this participation represents.
According to Duhem, demanding to participate, even with the best
intentions, can lead to control and exploitation of the participants
rather than emancipation[^11], including in what he refers to as
alternative design. What agency is given to the users of these tools?
Are they encouraged to \"participate\" in the same way as click workers,
who can only operate within a limited set of choices and remain
anonymous behind the tool\'s designer? Creating a framework, a set of
graphical constraints utilized by others to generate final forms, is not
a novel concept. Indeed, it is even the principle behind graphic
charters. However, the creation and use of these systems were not
introduced as collaborative.

Speaking of collaborative creation tools implies considering this
dichotomy and delving into the mechanics of collaboration, which
indicates different ways of getting involved. Collaborative creation
tools are accompanied by a new divide between those who know how to
create or manipulate tools, and those who can only use them. I believe
there is still a need to explore ways to bridge this divide.

[^1]:  Andrew Blauvelt, *Outil *or *le designer graphique face à la
    post-production *(Graphic designers and post-production), Azimut 47.
    Online Access:
    <https://revue-azimuts.fr/numeros/47/outil-ou-le-designer-graphique-face-a-la-post-production>

[^2]:  Jonathan Puckey quoted by Andrew Blauvelt, op. cit.

[^3]:  Anthony Masure, «Visual Culture. Open Source Publishing, Git et
    le design graphique», Strabic.fr, 2014.

[^4]:  Andrew Blauvelt, op. cit.

[^5]:  Pelle Ehn, « Scandinavian design: On participation and skill »,
    Participatory design. CRC Press, 2017. p. 41-77.

[^6]:  Ludovic Duhem, « Participez ! Pour une critique politique du
    co-design », RADDAR N°3, 2021.

[^7]:  Yann Aucompte, « Des mondes-ateliers : les lieux et les milieux
    de la fabrique du design graphique. », in Revue Design Arts Medias,
    11/2021. Online Access:
    <https://journal.dampress.org/issues/les-arts-de-faire-acte1-les-modes-dexistence-de-latelier-en-arts-et-en-design/des-mondes-ateliers-les-lieux-et-les-milieux-de-la-fabrique-du-design-graphique>

[^8]:  Eric Schrijver, « No-one Starts From Scratch: Type Design and the
    Logic of the Fork », i.liketightpants.net, 2013. Online access:
    <https://i.liketightpants.net/and/no-one-starts-from-scratch-type-design-and-the-logic-of-the-fork>

[^9]:  Yann Aucompte, « Les designerly ways of knowing des graphistes »,
    dans *Design Graphique ? Manières de faire de la recherche*, 2021.
    Online Access:
    <https://culturesvisuelles.org/projets/design-graphique-manieres-de-faire-de-la-recherche/les-designerly-ways-of-knowing-des-graphistes>

[^10]:  Andrew Blauvelt, op. cit

[^11]:  Ludovic Duhem, op. cit
