---
layout: page
tags: article
title: Designing tools
url: '/designing-tools-for-creative-collaboration/'

eleventyNavigation:
  key: ourcollaborative.tools
  parent: Designing Tools for Creative Collaboration
  order: 5
---

## ourcollaborative.tools

As part of the DTCC project, our goal was to create a publication that
would serve as a long-term tool---a device that synthesizes our research
conducted in collaboration at ESADSE and that would be useful for
designers, artists, students, and academics.

At first, we envisioned a toolkit, but ultimately, we conceived of a
platform called ourcollaborative.tools. This platform serves as an
online design research publication, a participatory archive, and a
pedagogical tool. It features a catalog of collective artistic projects
involving digital tools, emphasizing situated responses rather than
generic solutions. Additionally, it includes articles that provide
critical thinking to explore alternative uses and approaches in creative
collaboration.

The platform is intended for use by designers and artists, whether they
are students or professionals, who are interested in topics such as
collaboration, cooperation, contribution, participation, the creative
process, free software (FOSS), computer development, and visual arts.

All the projects listed in this catalog contribute to the development of
commons through digital artistic devices. The artists and designers who
create these projects are, each in their own way, establishing
frameworks to facilitate collaborations. These collaborations may
involve peers, experts from other disciplines, classrooms, inhabitants
of specific territories, and even non-human entities. We are
particularly intrigued by the ambivalent nature of these productions,
which serve as both artworks and tools.

However, our goal extends beyond merely archiving projects. We also aim
to document collective practices and examine how artists and designers
utilize, combine, and even modify existing tools, as well as develop new
ones that align with their unique working methods, so that these tools
can be adapted to align with their specific working methods and not the
other way around. To achieve this, we will curate a collection of
articles and a mediagraphy that provide a critical perspective on
digital collaboration and the creation of situated tools for artistic
purposes.

By interconnecting projects and articles through shared concepts and
data, this participatory archive serves as a bridge between artworks,
narratives of creative processes, theoretical insights, and critical
thinking.

We are continuously working on its design and editorial structure and we
will continue for some time. With a small team and through workshops, we
would like to push this object as far as possible in order to really
make it a tool that could be used for several purposes. This project is
in progress, here is an abstract of our intentions and current work for
*ourcollaborative.tools*.

{% image "20230421160113.png", "Index", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Home page and Index of ourcollaborative.tools</figcaption>

### What's inside?

#### Projects

Each project is presented in the form of a sheet that provides the
title, description, year of creation if it exists, the author(s), a link
to the source, usage, temporality, the technical environment and
pictures of the project. We are still thinking about other entries we
could add, like tools used to make it, licenses, and programming
languages.

Notions are also associated with each project as tags that connects them
with articles related.

{% image "20230421160147.png", "Project", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Project page template</figcaption>

#### Articles

We invited several academics and practitioners to tell us about their
visions of creative collaboration through the filter of their own
professional experience. We asked them to write a text as close as
possible to their sensibilities to build a corpus of situated articles,
in relation to our subject. These texts are either stories of projects
presented from a critical perspective, or theoretical texts linked to
the authors\' research work.

Projects and notions are associated with each text to create an
ecosystem of relationships within the various contents of
*ourcollaborative.tools*.

Here is a shortlist of the contributions that we know will be published
on *ourcollaborative.tools*:

-   Garcin, S. (2023). Digital Tools for Creative Collaboration:
    Logbook.
-   Maudet, N. (2023). Appropriate to Better Share: Digital tools for
    Design Collaboration.
-   Mertens, A. (2023). Holding Space for Discomfort in Collective Work:
    A Potential Role for Trees.
-   ooooo (2023). \[unknown title: article about feminist servers and
    federation\].

More articles will be added later on.

{% image "20230421160210.png", "Article", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Article page template</figcaption>

#### Notions

We intend to enhance the platform with a lexicon of notions related to
our research topic. Each concept will be accompanied by its definition,
creating a common vocabulary base aimed at engaging a non-initiated
audience. This index of notions will also serve as a search filter,
allowing users to click on a concept to open a list of associated
projects and articles.

{% image "20230421160352.png", "Notion", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Notion index</figcaption>

#### Ressources

We want this catalog to be as rich as possible. Due to financial
constraints and to further enrich the research conducted within this
project, we have decided to incorporate a mediagraphy. The mediagraphy
will consist of references to articles, books, websites, and other
relevant sources that offer diverse perspectives on the subject of
digital tools for collaboration in art and design practices. We will
continuously update this library with suggestions from guest authors,
students, teachers involved in the project, as well as contributions
from external sources. The mediagraphy follows the APA model to ensure
compatibility with current research norms and academic formats.

{% image "20230421160411.png", "Reference", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>References for the project as book, article, website</figcaption>

#### Images

We have made the deliberate choice to allocate a significant portion of
the platform to visual content, allowing ample space for interface
illustrations and screenshots of the indexed projects. This decision was
made to highlight and appreciate their formal design. In addition, we
aim to provide generous visual support within the articles, continuously
bridging the gap between practice and theory.

### How is it built?

We invited Benjamin Dumond from Bonjour Monde studio. As a graphic and
interaction designer, Benjamin was responsible for building the
website\'s graphic identity and developing the interface\'s logic. Since
we consider *ourcollaborative.tools* as a design object in itself, we
aimed for a strong and distinctive identity.

We then collaborated on designing the user experience. The development
and editorial work are being carried out by our Random() team to ensure
ongoing evolution and maintenance in the coming years.

*ourcollaborative.tools* is composed of two parts:

First, the back office is built on the Django framework and consists of
a REST API that publishes all content in JSON format. This allows us to
create other graphical applications using the same data. Django is
well-suited for content-rich platforms and can be easily scaled
according to future developments.

Second, the frontend is based on Vue.js, which provides us with ample
flexibility during extensive testing and allows for quick corrections.

The database system is currently in development mode and will soon
transition to a PostgreSQL database. The entire platform is exclusively
built using free software, including the interface design created with
Inkscape, and of course, the development of the platform using Django
and Vue.js. All the source code will be made available in open access
retrospectively.

### How to use it?

The platform is designed to facilitate the creation of meaningful
connections between its various components. The overarching goal is to
provide users with a wide range of options for exploring the content.
Additionally, the platform aims to evolve into a participatory archive
that encourages contributions from anyone interested in enriching its
content.

#### Explore

With *ourcollaborative.tools*, our ambition is to create a rich and
dynamic database of content for users to explore. The platform is
designed to ensure that each element is interconnected with others.

Here are some of the ways users can browse the content:

-   The entry page serves as the index of projects, prioritizing visual
    elements such as pictures. As well as the pages dedicated for
    \"Articles\", \"Authors\", \"Notions\", and \"Media\", each
    providing access to the corresponding content categories.
-   Each element within the platform is accompanied by associated data,
    including the date of creation, usage, temporality, etc. These data
    points also serve as filters, and clicking on them leads to a
    curated list of related content.
-   Users can also utilize the search feature to explore projects,
    notions, and articles based on specific keywords or terms.

In conclusion, *ourcollaborative.tools* is designed to empower users to
navigate through the information by allowing them to customize their own
pathways and explore the data according to their preferences.

#### Participate

For now, we are feeding the platform with a curated selection of
projects, articles, notions, and resources from our own collection, as
well as contributions from a select group of artists, designers, and
academics within our network.

However, *ourcollaborative.tools* is designed as a participatory archive
and will soon be open to proposals from a wider community. Symbolically,
it aims to engage a community of creators who are motivated by the idea
of creative collaboration.

In order to maintain editorial coherence, we are in the process of
deciding how we want to moderate the platform. We are currently
considering the implementation of participation guidelines and the
development of a submission form for content that would require
validation before publication.

### What will come next?

From the beginning, *ourcollaborative.tools* has been designed as a
pedagogical tool to be used in our schools. The next step will involve
testing it with students. Initially, we intend to use it for research
work, leveraging its potential as a participative archive with rich
content to explore and contribute to. Furthermore, as a constantly
evolving tool, we aim to involve students in improving it from both
technical and editorial perspectives.

Furthermore, as a dynamic database with interoperability, we envision
ourcollaborative.tools taking on various forms such as web-to-print
publications, exhibitions, and more. We would like to explore these
possibilities with students through collaborative curatorial, editorial,
and design projects.

It is of utmost importance to us that this platform does not become a
static archive but remains a malleable entity in constant evolution. To
achieve this, *ourcollaborative.tools* will be passed from hand to hand,
it will grow, mutate, and be forked through classes and workshops

