---
layout: page
tags: article
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Design Pedagogy in HfG
  parent: The meeting of different approaches
  order: 2
---

## Design Pedagogy in HfG, Schwäbisch-Gmünd

*"Education is the passport to the future, for tomorrow belongs to those who prepare for it today."* (Malcolm X, 1964)

### Brief History
The roots of the university go back to 1776, when the first predecessor institution, a drawing school, was founded. In 1860 it was transformed to a royal college for the then important precious metal industry in Schwaäbisch Gmünd. The influences of the Bauhaus and the Ulm School of Design (Hochschule für Gestaltung Ulm) are formative both in structure and orientation for the general teaching approach at the Schwäbisch Gmünd School of Design.

In 1972 the "University of Applied Sciences for Design" (Fachhochschule für Gestaltung), today School of Design (Hochschule für Gestaltung, in short HfG) is constituted. Prof. Karl Dittert as the founding rector oriented both the name and the educational concept of the previously very artistically oriented institution towards the design premises of the Ulm School of Design. In 2004 bachelor and master programs were established in the framework of the european bologna process, which also led to the transformation of the focus “Media Design” as elective option in the visual communication program into the BA program “Interaction Design”, established in 2007 as the first of its kind in Germany. This consequent orientation towards technological developments also led to the foundation of the fourth BA Program “Internet of Things – Design of  networked Systems”, now “Digital Product Development” in 2014.

Today, the university has around 750 Students in five design programs on the premises of a relatively small campus with five locations, most notably in the historical art nouveau building from 1909 that already hosted the royal drawing school. It is the smallest university in the federal state of Baden-Württemberg, it offers exclusively design study programs and admits about 230 students per year to tis bachelor programs. These programs are mainly project oriented and are thaught in small student groups of around 15 to 20 students per course. 

### Bauhaus, Ulm School of Design
The dynamism and creative power of HfG stem from the delicate balance between current scientific, social, and economic developments and the continuous tradition that underlies the university. This tradition is heavily influenced by the teaching methodologies of the Bauhaus and specifically the Ulm School of Design. The founders of Bauhaus were responding to a profound change in society and culture where industrialization changed everyday lives at an unprecedented scale. They believed that in exchange for productivity, we lost art, humanity, and nature. Bauhaus sought to correct this and translate mere objects into artistic - and therefore more human - connections. They taught that form and function are interconnected. 

After the atrocities of world war two the founders of the Ulm School of Design (hfg ulm) deeply believed that design as a rational way of problem solving, rather than artistic expression, was needed to amend the humanitarian, political and factual davastations after the war and that design may have a positive impact on society. They were amongst the pioneers of transferring methodologies from the sciences to design, of system thinking, of sustainability. Ulm presented a paradigm change for design in Europe. Both of those famous Institutions, Ulm even more so, still play an important role in the orientation of Design education in Schwäbisch Gmünd and reflect HfG's firm belief in the transformative power of education and the criticality of preparing students for the challenges of the future. A century after Bauhaus, industrialization has shifted to digitization with a massive impact on everyday lives. The scale of design has traveled from the tangible into the intangible. It’s not only the objects we create and use, but also their interfaces and logic, social implications and societal impact. The straining ecological effects of mass production are still - and maybe more than ever - an important concern. But Design is now also mass-producing feelings, and at an unprecedented scale. Design creates digital experiences that reach millions, experiences that engage and make people react. Manufacturing those expereinces has a profound effect on society, creating enormous opportunities to empower, to connect, to motivate and enlighten. But like all technology, it often has unintended consequences that create harm, isolation, fear, and doubt. Function now extends into behavioral science. Designers influence these experiences, and therefore society and humanity at scale.

### Design as interconnected discipline
HfG holds a profound belief that design as a discipline encompasses scientific, social, and technical references and that design practices should play an influential role in shaping cultural, technical, and economic developments in a responsible and sustainable manner. Unlike many other design schools, HfG deliberately deviates from emphasizing artistic or artisanal prerequisites in the teaching of design fundamentals. Instead, all five study programs at HfG are focused on imparting scientific knowledge and cultivating rational decision-making skills to justify design choices.

### Systematic basic training
One of the defining features of HfG is its intensive and interdisciplinary approach to basic training. This comprehensive training sets the foundation for the following specific curricular model of the respective design program and ensures a consistent quality of design studies. During this phase, students are equipped with a reliable repertoire of methods, gain formal aesthetic experience, and learn various techniques. They delve into the laws governing surface and space, light and color, as well as time and movement. This systematic study of design fundamentals prepares students for future design tasks and aims to enhance their problem-solving competence.

The teaching concept at HfG is designed holistically, incorporating a combination of coherent teaching programs, self-determined learning, practical relevance, international orientation, and collaborations with other institutions and, when appropriate, companies. The aim is to foster curiosity, inquisitiveness, and methodical thinking among students while strengthening their social and intercultural skills. HfG tries to encourage an open culture of discussion between students and lecturers, creating an atmosphere of intellectual exchange and exploration. Following the initial three semesters of basic studies, students at HfG have the opportunity to work on projects that align with their individual interests and passions. In addition to engaging in effective individual case studies, all teaching programs emphasize the development of solution-oriented principles to address identified problems. This approach showcases the model character of the projects and serves as a valuable demonstration for future design tasks. HfG believes that critical-methodical thinking, theoretical backgrounds, and practical skills are interconnected and essential for the growth and development of well-rounded designers.

### Teamwork
HfG places a strong emphasis on group projects rather than personal projects, with a focus on developing solutions through the identification and understanding of problems. The university prioritizes rational decision-making over artistic exploration, while maintaining a critical stance towards the influence of big tech and big money, striving to strike a balance between the utilization of technology and the ethical implications associated with it. The pedagogic concept at HfG is rooted in the belief that design has the potential to improve human living conditions, regardless of the scale or scope of projects. This core belief drives the university's commitment to responsible and impactful design practices.

### Rationality
HfG recognizes the significance of scientific principles in design. By integrating scientific, social, and technical aspects into the curriculum, HfG adopts a rational and systematic approach to design education. The university acknowledges that design is not solely an artistic endeavor but a discipline that requires a comprehensive understanding of underlying scientific foubndations and technological concepts. Through the imparting of scientific knowledge and the promotion of rational decision-making, HfG aims to equip its students with the necessary tools to navigate the complexities of the design landscape.

### Method-based critical thinking
The teaching concept at HfG is designed to foster intellectual curiosity, methodical thinking, and interdisciplinary collaboration. Students are encouraged to engage in critical discourse, explore different perspectives, and challenge established norms. The open culture of discussion with lecturers creates an environment that nurtures intellectual growth and encourages students to develop their own design philosophies.

### Real-world-projects to address real-world problems
Through project-based learning, students at HfG gain hands-on experience in tackling real-world design challenges. The emphasis on identifying and understanding problems ensures that students develop a deep understanding of user needs and societal contexts. By focusing on solution-oriented design principles, students are empowered to create innovative and meaningful solutions that address the pressing issues of our time.

### Interaction Design
One distinctive program at HfG is the discipline of Interaction Design. It positions itself at the intersection of design, psychology, mechanical engineering, and computer science.
HfG recognizes that designing exceptional products requires not only a solid understanding of design principles but also the ability to effectively communicate with specialists from mechanical engineering and computer science. Consequently, the Interaction Design program provides students with insights into digital technology and programming, albeit only to the extent necessary for the design process.

The curriculum of the Interaction Design program encompasses a wide range of topics, including software interfaces, machine and device controls, internet applications, information systems, and the utilization of the latest technologies. The program goes beyond the realm of developing mobile apps, as interaction designers are needed wherever new digital technologies emerge. HfG acknowledges that technology alone does not guarantee a successful product. Instead, it emphasizes the importance of innovative ideas and coherent design in creating useful applications that are both easy and enjoyable to use. This user-centric approach is the overarching goal of the Interaction Design program.

### Design contributing to society, pro technology
HfG's approach to education is rooted in its belief in the transformative power of design. The university recognizes the need for responsible and sustainable design practices that contribute positively to society. By instilling a critical stance towards the influence of big tech and big money, HfG encourages students to consider the ethical implications of their design decisions. The university strives to create designers who are conscious of the social, cultural, and environmental impact of their work, working towards bettering human living conditions in various domains.

**Marc Guntow**
