---
layout: page
tags: article
title: 'Introduction'
url: '/'

eleventyNavigation:
  key: What is the aim of DTCC project?
  parent: Introduction
  order: 1
---

## What is the aim of Digital Tools for Creative Collaboration?

The aim of this art and design-oriented project is to engage teachers,
students, and staff from art and design schools in a collective
reflection on the challenges presented by online collaboration for
creative purposes. Through a critical lens, we seek to raise awareness
about \'good practices\' and the ecological impact of these new working
methods, as well as the responsibilities associated with data
processing, data security, etc. Additionally, this project provides a
valuable opportunity to collaborate with international partners who
share our concerns and inquiries about art and design education.

With the DTCC project, our aims are as follows:

-   Build a critical thinking regarding collaborative tools employed
    within our schools.
-   Analyze the notions of collaboration, cooperation, contribution and
    participation in relation to art and design practices.
-   Engage in collective prototyping of tools for creative collaboration
    that align with our specific practices.
-   Conduct research on the development of situated tools for
    collaborative projects by artists and designers.
-   Equip students, teachers and staff in art and design Higher
    Education Institutions (HEIs) with the necessary skills and tools,
    ensuring sustainable conditions for digital creative collaboration.
-   Involve students as collaborators by involving them in each step of
    the project for pedagogical purposes.
-   Examine at our own international collaboration scenario as a case of
    study.

To achieve these goals, the consortium has or will:

-   Conduct exploratory research on collaborative digital practices in
    art and design higher schools.
-   Develop and test prototypes of collaborative games, software and
    interfaces for the creative sector.
-   Create "*ourcollaborative.tools"*, an online catalog of
    participatory artistic collaborative projects based on digital
    tools. The catalog can be accessed at:
    [ourcollaborative.tools](https://ourcollaborative.tools/)
-   Present the project outputs through three exhibitions, one hosted at
    each of the partner schools.

Three intensive international workshops, serving as significant
milestones of the project, have been organized to actively engage and
involve all interested participants in the development of DTCC. The work
initiated during these brief workshops often continued during subsequent
classes.

Additionally, several events have taken place or are planned to showcase
the project\'s results and enable us to reach a wider audience:

-   *openschool.art* professional meetings and its presentation at the
    *Le Monde Sinon Rien* exhibition during the Biennale Internationale
    Design Saint-Etienne 2022. *openschool.art* had a second edition
    organized by ENSAD Paris in March 2023.
-   IxDA Seminar at EKA Tallinn.
-   International Seminar Week (ISW) at HfG Schwäbisch-Gmünd;
-   OpenOpen event at ESAC Cambra.
-   Exhibitions at EKA, HfG and ESADSE, each offering a similar yet
    unique experience.
