---
layout: page
tags: article
title: Introduction
url: '/'

eleventyNavigation:
  key: What is the purpose of this publication?
  parent: Introduction
  order: 2
---

## What is the purpose of this publication?

### We learn from experience

We learn and grow from our experiences, especially those that involve
long-term collaboration. The human factor plays a crucial role in design
projects, with designers often working in interdisciplinary teams. As
educators, a significant part of our responsibility is to support
students in developing the ability to work effectively in collaborative
situations, even when faced with challenges and complexities. The DTCC
project provided us with an immersive experience focused on (digital)
creative collaboration. It became a primary case study as we ourselves
worked together under difficult conditions - during the COVID and
post-COVID era, across different cultural backgrounds, and in the
English language. This experience has been immensely valuable, offering
valuable lessons for both students and teachers alike.

With this publication, our aim is to share the narrative of our
collaborative journey between EKA, HfG, and ESADSE as a starting point
for a global reflection on our pedagogical approaches. DTCC has been a
collective experience involving teachers, students, and staff from the
three schools. Throughout this process, we have critically examined the
purpose of our students\' training and the tools, including methods,
that underpin our teaching practices. Our collaboration has been
characterized by meetings, debates, and collective productions,
occasionally giving rise to friction that prompted us to challenge our
assumptions and explore diverse perspectives on digital design practices
and their instruction. For students, this project has represented a
significant opportunity to step out of their comfort zones, position
their practice within the broad spectrum of digital design, and
collaborate with individuals who bring distinct perspectives to the same
discipline and alternative approaches to project development.

We have constructed this publication based on the diverse activities and
associated productions that we have carried out over the past two years,
documenting them on a dedicated wiki platform created for the occasion.
These documents, written by several authors including students, serve as
a basis to examine the subject of design collaboration from a
pedagogical standpoint.

### A brief overview of what you can expect to find in this publication

In the first chapter, titled [Methodologies and Tools for
Collaboration](/methodologies-and-tools-for-collaboration/), we reflect on our initial workshop at EKA. This
workshop provided us with the opportunity to meet in person for the
first time, and we quickly realized that expecting seamless
collaboration without prior knowledge of each other\'s expectations and
work habits was somewhat utopian. Prior to, during, and after the
workshop, we made concerted efforts to collectively define the scope of
our subject, establish the current state of the art, and determine
effective ways of collaborating over the following months.

In the upcoming chapter, titled [Encounter between different approaches to digital art and design pedagogies](/Encounter-between-different-approaches-to-digital-art-and-design-pedagogies/), each school will present its
pedagogical approach and the distinctive aspects of its program.
Additionally, we will introduce the *openschool.art* professional
meetings, which were initiated as part of the project and focus on
addressing the challenges involved in teaching digital practices within
art and design schools.

In the chapter [Learning to Collaborate with Different Perspectives](/Learning-to-collaborate-with-different-perspectives/),
we reflect on the workshops held at ESADSE and HfG, where explored
creative collaboration strategies. Additionally, we provide a platform
for the students to share their testimonies, shedding light on their
experiences and the significance of this two-year collaboration for them

Then, in the chapter [Designing Tools for Creative Collaboration](/designing-tools-for-creative-collaboration/), we
continue documenting our workshops at HfG and showcase the interfaces
and prototypes of the collaboration tools created by students.
Additionally, we include two articles by designers whose work revolves
around the development of tools and collective practices. Furthermore,
we introduce [ourcollaborative.tools](https://ourcollaborative.tools), an online platform that we are
currently building. This platform serves as a participatory archive of
artistic projects involving digital devices and collaborative endeavors.

Lastly, in the chapter [Making Exhibitions as a Collective and
Pedagogical Practice](/making-exhibitions-as-a-collective-and-pedagogical-practice/), we will discuss our intention of organizing
three exhibitions of the DTCC project, hosted individually at each of
the partner schools. We will explore how this endeavor aligns with our
pedagogical approaches and discuss the ways in which the exhibition
format is linked to our educational practices.

We hope you enjoy reading this publication and that our experiences and
reflections resonate with your own.
