---
layout: page
tags: article
title: Introduction
url: '/'

eleventyNavigation:
  key: How is it made?
  parent: Introduction
  order: 3
---

## How is it made?

Over the course of two years, we collaborated utilizing various sharing
and communication tools, many of which were already implemented in our
schools, such as Google Drive, Zoom, etc. Additionally, we utilized
specific tools installed and used for the project, including Yunohost,
Big Blue Button, Nextcloud, and a wiki built using wiki.js. Through
these platforms, we gathered a substantial amount of material,
documentation, and images to contribute to our publication.The
publication is available in both a printable PDF format and as a website
accessible at the provided URL: [digitaltoolsforcreativecollaboration.art](https://digitaltoolsforcreativecollaboration.art).

From the outset, all the documentation and archives were conceptualized
as part of a hybrid publication chain, integrating various formats and
open-source tools. This editorial chain involves the wiki, markdown
files, images, and web-based applications that enable us to extract
content from the wiki and generate diverse publication formats. It
serves as a collaborative creation tool, facilitating the production of
our publications in different forms. The development of this chain has
been made possible thanks to the contributions and support of the free
software community.

Please note that the contents compiled in this edition embody a sense of
fragility. This fragility arises from the evolution of our perspectives
throughout the exchanges, workshops, and productions related to the
project, regarding both the subject matter and our methods. As a result,
the editorial design was approached incrementally, and the texts were
collaboratively written by multiple contributors.

This website and publication was generated the **1 july 2023** from the content of our wiki : wiki.ourwriting.tools, with customs apps based on [markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) markup language, [node.js](https://nodejs.org/en) runtime environment, [eleventy.js](https://www.11ty.dev/) static site generator and the [paged.js](https://pagedjs.org/) web to print library. 

[The Sources for the website are here](https://github.com/RandomLab/New_Pedagogical_online_offline_Realities.site)

[The Sources for the pdf are here](https://github.com/RandomLab/New_Pedagogical_online_offline_Realities.pub)


All the content are publish under the [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 

[A PDF edition of this publication is freely downloadable](/pdf/dtcc.pdf)
