---
layout: page
tags: article
eleventyNavigation:
  key: How is it made?
  parent: Introduction
  order: 3
---

## How is it made?

After two years of working together with the help of different sharing and communication tools, most of them already implemented in our schools as google drive, zoom etc, but some installed and used for the project like yunohost, big blue button, nextcloud and a wiki that we build based on wiki.js, we gathered a lot of material, documentation, images in order to feed a publication that is deployed in a printable form as a pdf file, and a website available at: [digitaltoolsforcreativecollaboration.art](https://digitaltoolsforcreativecollaboration.art/).
It is automatically built by a tool developed for the *Digital Tools for Creative Collaboration* project.

All the documentation and archive  was conceived from the start as an hybrid publication chain combining different formats and open source tools. This editorial chain, composed by the wiki, the markdown files and images, the web based applications that allows us to extract the content of the wiki, and to build with all the formats, is a collaborative creation tool whose goal is to produce the differents forms of our publications. It would not be possible possible without free software community. 

Note: A certain fragility emerges from the contents gathered in this edition, both because our views have evolved over the course of exchanges, workshops and productions, on the subject but also on our methods. The editorial design was therefore done in stages and the texts were written by several hands.

This website and publication was generated the **22 juin 2023** from the content of our wiki : wiki.ourwriting.tools, with a custom app based on markdown files, node.js, eleventy.js static site generator and the paged.js web to print library. 
[The Sources for the website are here](https://github.com/RandomLab/New_Pedagogical_online_offline_Realities.site)

All the content are publish under the [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
A PDF edition of this publication is freely downloadable from : [pdf](https://digitaltoolsforcreativecollaboration.art/pdf)
