---
layout: page
tags: article
title: Methodologies and tools
url: '/methodologies-and-tools-for-collaboration/'

eleventyNavigation:
  key: EKA's workshop
  parent: Methodologies and tools
  order: 1
---

## Dig­i­tal Tools for Cre­ative Col­lab­o­ra­tion, EKA's workshop, 25-29 October 2021, Tallin (EE)

{% image "img_8701.jpg", "First presentation at EKA in Tallinn", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>First presentation at EKA in Tallinn</figcaption>

The first workshop in Tallinn was a significant milestone as it marked
our first in-person meeting after having numerous fruitful exchanges
beforehand through platforms like Zoom and Big Blue Button. However, due
to unforeseen circumstances, we had to quickly synchronize our
expectations and adapt to the situation. Unfortunately, the initial plan
for an in-person meeting was canceled, and we didn\'t have the
opportunity to properly meet face to face. This unexpected turn of
events was mainly influenced by the challenges posed by the Covid-19
pandemic, which greatly impacted the organization of our collaborative
work during the first week.

In October 2021, we finally had the opportunity to meet in person at
EKA, Tallinn, bringing together both students and teachers. The week
proved to be intense and pedagogically challenging, particularly because
the students from Esadse had a strong inclination towards the Google
Sprint model and design thinking methods proposed by EKA, which are
commonly employed by our partners. However, the focus of the workshop
was on the students\' experiences of remote learning and collaborative
work, highlighting the isolation they faced during the pandemic.


### Subject and goals of the workshop

Since the first workshop was being held after the pandemic and DTCC
project emerging from its aftermath, discussions around the workshop
were obviously based on our experiences of teaching, learning and
working together remotely. This week was dedicated to the inventory of
tools we use for remote collaboration and to exchanging "good" or "bad"
experiences we had with them. This served as a basis to a common
reflection on what tools could have been better or complementary to
those we have, in order to ease remote collaborations or to allow new
ways of creating together at a distance.

During the whole project, workshops have been one of the important means
to involve students at every step of the way. This one is part of the
first phase of the DTCC project, dedicated to exploratory research (that
was documented by EKA in this publication, here, we intend to
document this workshop from a pedagogical perspective). The main goal of
this workshop was to encourage students to engage in analyzing the
digital tools used for collaboration during the pandemic and reflecting
on lack of tools. These two outlooks were both important to the study
and to the researchers.

### Introduction: projects and methods

As an introduction, some of the students as well as some of the teachers
Presented their previous works and ideas:

Jekaterina Suharenko, Conversations with the Water: Experiencing
Life-Centered Design

-   Marc Guntow and Ludwig Kannicht, Hybrid Workplaces
-   Hugo Saksik, Hardware controllers for digital graphic design
-   Samantha Zannoni, Create drawing tools

The EKA team led by Tanel Karp and Jekaterina Suharenko had prepared a
precise and busy program: the methodological model was strongly inspired
by a Google Sprint. The main idea was to find an efficient and
well-documented format to work together in a short time, combining
creativity exercises, meetings and design workshops. Marc Guntow and
Ludwig Kannicht are familiar with this type of format, and from the very
first hours they provided exercises to form working groups by topic.
Methodological tools were offered during the week to guide the
students' responses.

For example, Marc introduced us to the *Four-Step Sketch* method, an
exercise that helps people to create well-formed concepts through a
structured process that includes:

-   Reviewing key information
-   Starting design work on paper
-   Considering multiple variations
-   Creating a detailed solution


### Workshop's schedule

{% image "20211029_092944.jpg", "Our planning for the workshop's week", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Our planning for the workshop's week</figcaption>


### Talks and visits

The EKA team proposed meetings with designers, artists and visits to
their workplace to build interviews and gather data for exploratory
research in professional contexts. Each group went to talk about the
topics identified in the previous sessions as well as more generic
topics such as: how do you work and with what kind of tools? Do you use
pre-defined methods? How do you collaborate with one another as well as
with external collaborators or clients?

They had a video call with Annie Abrahams and visited:

-   TRINIDAD WISEMAN
-   Pipedrive
-   DUX

{% image "trinidad04.jpg", "Meeting with Trinidad Agency in Tallinn for research purposes", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Meeting with Trinidad Agency in Tallinn for research purposes</figcaption>

## Projects made by students

During the workshop, many topics based on our experiences during the
quarantine period, were expressed, from the best to the worst
situations:

-   on technical environment (how we depend on internet connection,
    accidental microphone on, etc.)
-   on social behavior (it is hard to get feedback, can or cannot be a
    peaceful moment for introvert people, etc.)
-   on cognitive overload (concentration problems, headaches, etc.)
-   on self-organization (wider possibilities to attend lectures, saving
    travelling time, etc.)

Once the material was gathered, the teams met to define their objectives
and discuss the data collected.

Four topics were chosen:

-   online social behavior, politics
-   emotional bonds
-   work/life balance
-   motivation and creativity

We quickly understood that it was not reasonable to think of devices or
software. As we realized that we work in very different manners and are
used to make distinct types of productions, we spent a lot of time on
discussions and negotiations. Some interesting debates were initiated by
students and we decided to give them space to grow by exploring the
topics in depth and project them into situations.

At the end of each days, teams made a presentation of their progress and
documented their paths on our collaborative wiki.

#### Emotional bonds

There is a strong connection between emotional bonds and creativity. The
group is creating a social link about the rituals (individual, or
social) #emotionalbond #privatespace #personalexperience. What is a
ritual? Why is it important to share?

The group has come up with an idea for a gardening app, inspired by the
theme of rituals. They have brainstormed the elements that will be
included in their product, identified the target users, considered the
user experience, designed the interface prototype, and created user
stories. They have also completed the prototyping phase and will further
develop the visualization.

They wanted to create a gardening community where people can grow
together while still having their own individual experiences. The
results would be shared among the community members, fostering a sense
of collective participation. The digital tool aims to reinforce
interpersonal relationships by addressing questions such as how it will
function, how people will feel a sense of belonging to the community,
how it will create meaning, and how it can be inclusive. They have
designed a system that is free from hierarchy.

The group wants to make a prototype of how the platform will look like
and what experiences it would create (interactive communication):

-   be in contact communication but without a tuff structure
-   NFC scanner to be sure that the person is present.

Gardening is about responsibilities, so it is very important to be
present. Scan the code and see who the gardener is.

{% image "img_8683.jpg", "First sketches for the *Emotional bonds* project", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "img_8684.jpg", "First sketches for the *Emotional bonds* project", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>First sketches for the *Emotional bonds* project</figcaption>

#### Motivation and creativity (music)

Audio is often overlooked, yet it plays a crucial role. We need to
identify the problem we aim to solve. How can we make audio more
personalized? How can we enhance personal interaction in digital
communication? The theme of sound was not given much attention during
the discussions. How can we bring energy and liveliness to participant
communication during calls? These are the questions we need to address.
We should consider the target audience and the specific context in which
we are designing. #team #collaboration #sound

The aim of the project is to enhance motivation during study and work
sessions, as well as lectures. Many of us have a deep connection with
sound. The group came up with the idea of jamming sessions using
microphones. This provides musicians with a unique opportunity to engage
in digital collaborations, as it is a playful way of utilizing digital
tools. It also allows for connections with different musicians. The
group explored potential issues with delays and is focused on creating a
fun and creative atmosphere while using this tool. They are also
exploring a more gamified experience and have been inspired by various
references.

Perhaps we will show the references tomorrow during the presentation.
Groups express the need to envision the visual interface concept,
considering aspects such as sound communication, whether it includes a
camera, chatting capabilities, or other features. Sound is a way of
communication. They have also created wireframes to determine the
elements they want to incorporate into this tool. Musicians and
non-musicians are involved in this process, aiming to achieve radical
simplicity. They are considering factors such as the session start time,
instrument choices, and the ability to control access to the jamming
space. Addressing the issue of delay in live sessions is a challenge
they need to overcome. The goal is to enable multiple participants to
contribute sounds to an existing \'music\' piece. They are exploring
options for simplified instrument choices. Their main focus is to grasp
the system\'s functionality and establish a basic premise for the
project.

This tool is not to be utilized by professional musicians since it might
not fully meet their requirements or expectations. However, musicians
could potentially create a library that allows other users to explore
and engage with it. This goes beyond the limits of design bubble,
inviting anyone who is interested in music to participate. It is a tool
designed for creative people, allowing them to freely express themselves
without necessarily knowing how to play a physical instrument.

{% image "img_8659.jpg", "First sketches and moodboard for *Motivation and creativity*", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "img_8673.jpg", "First sketches and moodboard for *Motivation and creativity*", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>First sketches and moodboard for *Motivation and creativity*</figcaption>

#### Social behaviour online, politics

The problem we encountered was trying to understand why we are here
together in this workshop. After a long discussion and sharing several
insights gained from an interview that took place earlier that day with
Annie Abrahams and Ülo Vihma, we had a dot-voting session to gauge our
ideas. We collectively arrived at the idea of developing a *transpire
*platform which consists various formats such as discussion mode,
presentation mode, and classroom mode. We established clear roles for
each participant in the conversation, determining who they are and the
specific roles they play. Additionally, we discussed the importance of
gathering feedback in real-time while a person is presenting. How we
want to get feedback while the person is presenting. For example, we can
use emojis to show if we agree or disagree. The way how people
communicate during the pandemic has changed tremendously, people started
using corporation platforms like Zoom, Google Meets, Slack etc., as
opposed to the traditional classroom interactions that were prevalent
before.

During one-on-one debates and discussions, we asked what digital space
can provide while not being a physical space; what is the role of
individuals, what would be the different characters, relationships and
responsibilities towards actions. They aimed to introduce certain
functionalities related to user interaction. For example, participants
within the Zoom ecosystem engage in digital interactions both as
individuals and as members of the community.

How to represent one's self when in a digital space? For instance, we
reflected on the camera mode while trying to explore alternative forms
of representation. This includes options like choosing a color or a
drawing to express oneself, recognizing that not everyone may feel at
ease appearing on video. Additionally, our considerations expanded to
more experimental avenues, such as incorporating sound.

We haven't discussed further about distinct modes, such as switch modes.
It is possible to choose pre-settings (structure or default settings
that will help the user to be more engaged). There would be only one
tool where the user can switch modes easily so the software could adapt
accordingly. However, we haven't tested it yet. We experienced Zoom
during the lockdown. Sometimes, discussions might not work so well, and
breakout rooms might not be the best solution. We have made it an
obligation to say goodbye, thank you for the lesson, and switching the
microphone on. But there was always something missing. In the digital
space, there are certain limitations. It is crucial to recognize that
digital and physical mediums have distinct characteristics. Therefore,
we took a step back to evaluate our actual needs and explore how we can
use these specific elements to improve the overall experience. By
considering the unique context of social interaction, we must be prudent
about proposing romantic scenarios, as it raises ethical questions that
require careful consideration. While we haven't yet thought about the
graphic interface, our focus is more on developing the features.

{% image "social1c.jpg", "Research and ideation for *Social behaviour* ", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "social3c.jpg", "Research and ideation for *Social behaviour* ", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Research and ideation for *Social behaviour* </figcaption>

#### Work/life balance

Our topic is separating work and personal life. The idea was to create a
"buddy", connected to the calendar. There are multiple ways of using
this feature; firstly, the buddy notifying you to take breaks, secondly
approach incorporates physical cubes that can be interacted with on a
tactile level, offering various work modes, as well as providing
exercises to offer help to deal with stress. If you are stressed, the
app tracks it down and notifies you about it, helps you reflect on your
day, and your achievements. The buddy helps you not to have a burn out
and organize your life in a more ecological way.

Start with setting up your mode cube to enter your mood, your team,
enter time while checking in and checking out, accomplishments of the
day and planning of the next days, as well as giving you the opportunity
to share it all between users.

Next step is to create a storyboard to help you organize your day. It is
a two-way communication: the app will give you advice on how to make you
less stressed, encourage you to take a walk and get away from the screen
to be able to separate the work time and personal life.

The questions are multiple: Who should be in charge to program the
buddy: a friend, a colleague, or a psychologist?

How to prevent an addiction towards the Buddy while allowing the users
continue to listen to themselves? Since this data can be used in both
ways, it can empower both parties.

Various forms of analytics can be generated, encompassing personal data
and addressing potential concerns related to privacy. The buddies can
foster a community-like environment, where friends come together to
discuss and enhance their collaborative work processes.

The buddy was created with the aim of helping people to not to overwork
themselves.

{% image "img_8681.jpg", "Research, Sketches and mockup for the *Work/life balance*", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
{% image "20211028_161904.jpg", "Research, Sketches and mockup for the *Work/life balance*", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Research, Sketches and mockup for the *Work/life balance* </figcaption>

## Participants

#### EKA

Alicia HARDEGEN, Artemiy GUSLISTOV, Jekaterina SUHARENKO, Kai RAKU, Quinn DARBY FELLER, Natsumi NONAKA, Sigmund ABOU CHROUCH, Tanel KÄRP, Yareni, DURIEZ URIAS.

#### Esadse

Adrien DELIMARD, Alix DIAZ, David-Olivier LARTIGAUD,Ekaterina BRYTKOVA, François BRUMENT, Heloïse DEBRAND, Hugo GUYOMARD, Inge ELLER, Jérémie NUEL, Laura EGO, Manon PICAT, Mathias HU, Vadim DROBOT, Samantha ZANNONI.

#### HfG

Bianca TILLMANN, Lucie WITTMER, Ludwig KANNICHT, Marc GUNTOW, Luis PFLÜGER, Thang NGUYEN, Vanessa SIGG, Yannick HOFFMEISTER.

### Shared references

#### People

[Annie Abrahams](https://bram.org/) did a video-call interview with
students during the workshop. 

[Total refusal](https://totalrefusal.com/)
is an artists\' collective, they made a twitch ballad in GTA.

#### Tools

Slack, Asana, Miro, Reddit, Zoom, Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat, What\'s
app, Wiki.js

[Shared Piano](https://musiclab.chromeexperiments.com/Shared-Piano/) is
a simple tool for remote music teaching and collaboration that lets you
play music together live on the web. It\'s part of the project Chrome
Lab Experiment, launched by Google.

[Incredibox](https://www.incredibox.com/) is an interactive music
experience, half a game and a tool.

#### Methods

[\"What if\...?\" method](https://miro.com/miroverse/what-if-method/)

[The \"Four-Step Sketch\" method by Jake
Knapp](https://www.sessionlab.com/methods/four-step-sketch) is an
exercise that helps people to create well-formed concepts through a
structured process.

#### Other

[Open Emoji](https://openmoji.org/library/) is an open-source icons
library.

[120 years of electronic music](https://120years.net/wordpress/) is a
project that outlines and explores the history and development of
electronic musical instruments from around 1880 onwards. It was
initiated in 1995 by the author and musician Simon Crab.

[Very Nervous System](http://www.davidrokeby.com/vns.html)(1986-1990) of
David Rokeby is an installation where he used video camera, computer,
synthesizer, image processor and a sound system to produce music with
his body.

[Midi Art](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EO2CO0X-bAQ) is based on
making illustration in a MIDI interface. In this way, the usual
\"rectangles\" (corresponding to tones) are organized to form a graphic
content, which remain, in the other way, to a MIDI clip.

[Mass Interaction Digital Arts](http://www.mi-creative.eu/) is an open
platform, community, and resource database for mass-interaction physical
modelling in digital arts and creative fields. It is used in different
project in relation to music as [Sonification of Hand Gestures in Dance
Performance](http://www.mi-creative.eu/post_SonificationHandGesturesDancePerformance.html).

[Magenta RNN](https://magenta.tensorflow.org/) is an open-source
research project made by Google exploring the role of machine learning
as a tool in the creative process. It\'s available on Python and
JavaScript.

### Conclusion and openings

The biggest interest in this workshop was seeing our different
approaches on tools, methods and projects -- which was also the most
difficult and tiring part of the process. We were actually surprised to
see how different we were, but it is now what we consider to be the
strongest point of our collaboration. However, with the benefit of
hindsight, we can allow ourselves to say that if we were to repeat the
whole process, our differentiating methods and perspectives on design
and tools would be the core of our first workshop together.

Reflecting back on October 2021: Following a week of rich experience,
discussion, and thinking, each school went to back to its country of
origin. We had prepared a Wikipage to gather and document all the work,
which is the tool we have improved during the project and that we are
using currently for this publication. During the following months, each
school integrated the process of ideation, design and implementation of
mock-ups, interfaces and prototypes into their respective curricula.
This unification was influenced by the concepts and advancements
generated during the week-long session in Estonia.



