---
layout: page
tags: article
title: Methodologies and tools
url: '/methodologies-and-tools-for-collaboration/'

eleventyNavigation:
  key: Post-workshop
  parent: Methodologies and tools
  order: 2
---

## Post-workshop : designing post-pandemic tools for collaboration, student's projects.

After a few months, following the first workshop at EKA in Tallinn, our
students continued their researches by building new teams. Each school,
according to its organization and its academic calendar, has integrated
the subjects evoked during the initial workshops into its curriculum and
pedagogy.

An online final presentation of the students\' projects was planned on
the 18th February 2022 to share the results. Here are the projects they
have designed.

### A plugin for making small comments on a document with voice
#####  Natsumi NONAKA (EKA)

> How can we help people in giving quick and concise online feedback?

{% image "natsumi_dtcc_15.jpg", "Mockup of the plugin to comment Google documents", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "natsumi_dtcc_16.jpg", "Mockup of the plugin to comment Google documents", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Mockup of the plugin to comment Google documents</figcaption>

#### Why is this tool for?
My final concept is a plugin for making small voice comments.

#### Who is this tool for?
This tool is for teams working online.

#### How does it work?
When leaving a comment on Google Docs, you can record a short voice comment within 30 seconds. Moreover, when checking a comment, you can listen to the voice comment with an automatic description. 

#### What type of collaboration is it made for?
Asynchronous collaboration, feedbacks.

#### How did I came up with this idea?
To begin with, I have identified some research questions for the
project: What kind of digital tools do people use for collaboration?
Why? How do they collaborate online by using these tools? What kind of
problems do they have? etc. Based on those questions, I conducted desk
research and interviews with people who have experience in both office
and remote working.

Based on my research findings, I found that the absence of small, quick
interactions and feedback while working online could slow down the work.
Addition to that, while remote working, text-based communication is
increasingly replacing oral communication and non-verbal forms of
communication. Text-based communication helps communication to be more
accurate and well-structured while being also suitable for recording.
However, at the same time, text-based communication is time consuming
and compared to oral communication, makes it more difficult to express
feelings and emotions. Based on these findings, I decided to focus on
the problem concerning the lack of quick and concise feedback while
working online.


### A plugin for check-in and check-outs

##### Alicia HARDEGEN (EKA)

> How can we create a digital environment where we can emotionally connect
people with each other?

{% image "alicia_12.jpg", "Researchs for the plugin to check-in and out in video calls", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "alicia_11.jpg", "Researchs for the plugin to check-in and out in video calls", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Researchs for the plugin to check-in and out in video calls</figcaption>


#### Why is this tool for?

This plugin is a video meeting tool specifically designed for check-in
and check-out questions. It is already being used by many design teams.
It functions as a seatbelt to identify if someone needs help or can
provide support to others.

The check-in would be about warming up, checking on each other, sharing
something personal in order to create a digital environment where you
can connect with each other; whereas the check-out would be more about
reflecting, appreciation and feedback.

#### Who is this tool for?

This plugin is made for remote workers' teams and online classes.

#### How does it work?

An individual, for instance the moderator writes a check-in question
that aligns with the current session. Using a personalized question
often demonstrates a genuine interest, but there is also the option to
generate a question if inspiration is needed. Afterwards, the question
is answered in turn, with visual cues indicating the current speaker and
those who are yet to respond. If someone does not want to answer the
check-in question, they can press a button to change their status
without necessarily answering the question.

After everyone has answered the question, the meeting can start.

When you leave the meeting, you will be automatically redirected to the
check-out room, where a pre-existing or generated question related to
appreciation, feedback, or self-reflection will appear. The answers
given are visible either anonymously or with respondent's name depending
on the group's default settings. Considering that some individuals may
need to leave early, the concept is for everyone to individually submit
their check-out remarks, which will then be stored.

#### How did I came up with this idea?

After the workshop week, we cleared/reverted all that we had discussed.
Within the EKA team, we discussed about different kind of collaborative
apps and our shared experiences with them so far. In order to identify
patterns and issues across different categories, we made the decision to
divide them. Together with Quinn, we conducted a research on the topic
of communication.

To generate an HMW (How Might We) statement, we reviewed the complaints
and praises shared about the five tools we had previously assessed. We
gathered quotes from Quora and Reddit regarding topics such as "What are
the benefits of Slack?" or "What are the pros and cons in Zoom?". Each
quote was carefully tagged with relevant keywords for further analysis.
We collected quotes from Quora and reddit on entries like \"What are the
benefits of Slack?\" Or \"What are the pros and cons in Zoom.\" All
these quotes were marked with keywords. I added quotes from brief
guerrilla interviews to the same table. Among the various issues and
recurring patterns, we observed, the comments that resonated with me the
most were related to Zoom's inability to create a social environment and
its contribution to feelings of loneliness and distance.

My first approach to generate ideas was the Crazy 8 Method. During this
stage, I sketched various solutions for my HMW statement, exploring
possibilities such as improving feedback mechanisms, adding features to
facilitate emotional expression, and creating a safe space for
discussing personal matters. So, I started to read articles what kind of
games were suggested for remote teams to let the team spirit grow. The
problem I saw with many of those online games, like a photo competition,
was that often they take a lot of effort to prepare or can be only
played one time, but then I stumbled on an article about Team Check-Ins
and Check-Outs.

### A Slack plug-in that showcases the user's soft and hard skills

##### Sigmund ABOU CHROUCH (EKA)

> How can we establish a meaningful connection across a group that can
help all its members equally in their personal growth with digital
tools?

{% image "sigmund_17.jpg", "Mockup to explain how work a slack plug-in to show user's soft and hard skills", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "sigmund_18.jpg", "Mockup to explain how work a slack plug-in to show user's soft and hard skills", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Mockup to explain how work a slack plug-in to show user's soft and hard skills</figcaption>

#### Why is this tool for?
The final concept is a Slack plug-in that showcases the user\'s soft
skills, hard skills and tools that they possess, which would facilitate
more efficient collaboration within their team. Such a plug-in would
also overcome barriers of shyness, inviting people to seek assistance in
a more confident way, thereby igniting a sense of mentorship and
promoting learning.

#### Who is this tool for?
Slack-user medium to large teams.

#### How does it work?
The user would input their top skills, which would then appear on a
hexagon graph. This graph would help team members identifying who they
can approach for assistance or collaboration Additionally, it would
serve as a display to individuals outside the organization

After each collaboration, the other user can provide feedback by
\'endorsing\' the user\'s existing skills or suggesting new skills.

The graph will always display the top six skills, both in soft and hard
skills, that have received the most endorsements. If a new skill
surpasses the endorsements of one of the existing top skills, the new
skill will replace the previous one on the graph, and the cycle
continues.

#### How did I came up with this idea?

As a team, we've spent the first two weeks trying to understand the
world of collaborative applications. During this time, our focus was on
identifying the main players, understanding their Unique Selling Points
(USPs), studying their competitors, and searching for relevant blogs,
videos and other resources about these key applications. In addition, we
took the time to speak with individuals who actively use the identified
applications. Our aim was to understand their engagement patterns,
uncover their pain points, gather their preferences, and learn about the
challenges they have encountered and how they resolved them. Our goal
was to acquire comprehensive information that would enhance our
understanding of the subject matter. Furthermore, we were encouraged to
actively engage with the applications ourselves, utilizing them and
reflecting on our own experiences.

When checking the data collected by the team, two patterns stood out to
me. The first pattern revealed a group of individuals who lacked
knowledge or proper training on using the applications, resulting in
their inability to fully leverage the available features. The second one
showed a confident and proficient group who could easily work with the
applications.

What if the second group was able to guide the first group? This led me
to consider the following: How can we foster a meaningful connection
across a group using digital tools, enabling members to support each
other equally in their personal growth?

Once the problem has been identified with data and insights that we\'ve
collected and opportunities that we\'ve uncovered, coming up with ideas
to solve it can be unlimited. It is very important to establish certain
guidelines or a pathway that can guide the ideation process. Such
guidelines, which I have identified, are called design principles. They
are as follows:

-   Engaging is an important component that actively involves
    individuals, fosters interaction, and facilitates effective
    communication, which is a crucial element. Individual: In a
    collaborative effort, the collective\'s spirit and growth are
    determined by each individual\'s spirit and growth, therefore, the
    solution should facilitate individual growth.
-   Uplifting: Constructive criticism, acknowledging milestones, lending
    hand etc. contribute to the growth of the individual but also in the
    growth of the collective. And all that was mentioned in the
    beginning have a goal in recognizing the progress of the person,
    resulting in uplifting them rather than the opposite.

With these principles in mind, I proceeded with ideating by using the
crazy 8 method which is the \"core component of the design sprint stage
within design thinking.\" I was able to come up with 5 ideas, which
were:

-   A platform with free resources that everyone can contribute to and
    collaborate in creating. Individuals can create guides and resources
    and share them with everyone through the platform and such resources
    can be upgraded by everyone.
-   Virtual Rooms dedicated to various purposes such as discussions,
    design, and ideation etc. Each virtual room is equipped with tools
    specifically adapted to support the corresponding theme.
-   Gamifying the experience by celebrating each individual\'s strengths
    and collaboration skills, while also highlighting the unique
    qualities they bring to the group.
-    A Virtual Campfire where everyone is given the opportunity to share
    their thoughts and ideas.
-   An interactive box network where each box is connected to others.
    When one box is illuminated with a specific color, all connected
    boxes light up with the same color, fostering remote connections and
    facilitating communication.

Out of the 5 ideas, I moved forward with \"Gamifying the experience\".
The core idea of it is that it aids in one\'s personal development,
showcases their skill sets (hard skills, soft skills) and establishes
connections through highlighting the strengths of the individuals.

Through my research on gamification, the main elements of it stood out
that, collectively, would define the gamification experience
(Teodorescu, 2018). Other sources in my research of the elements that
would establish the solution decided on were LinkedIn skill assessments
and skill endorsements, where people can endorse you to enhance
visibility and credibility.

Another resource was shared with me by Alicia which is a Slack plug-in
called Hi-Ki, where one can tag anyone in their team with their skills,
interest or field of expertise which can be added to their profile on
Slack. The point of this plug-in is to get to know each other and get
closer, get the recognition for the work, find out who has the know-how
to tackle a specific task/solve a problem and have insight into the
strengths and talents of the entire team.

This led to the first raw idea: a plug-in for slack that is optional to
install for the team, where the goal is to develop their skills in the
use of digital tools by collaborating, helping and learning (hard skills
and soft skills). Giving the user the chance to engage with their
teammates, where they can also help and guide others in developing new
skills by assisting them if they ask for assistance.

### Yarte

##### Artemiy GUSLISTOV & Yareni DURIEZ URIAS (EKA)

> What happens when the references upon which most digital tools are based
do not align with your own experiences or references?

{% image "yarte!_10.jpg", "Ideation to understand the most standard tools part of our daily life", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Ideation to understand the most standard tools part of our daily life</figcaption>

#### Why is this tool for?

Based on the research, analysis and understanding of the popular, most
useful & almost standard tools that have become part of our daily life,
we designed the concept of **a plug-in for spontaneous collaborative
drawn art** we called Yarte.

The concept supports the idea of providing help, motivation, and
inspiration by creating a context. It aims to offer an accessible
first-hand experience in a creative environment for individuals who want
to join or have access to the world of drawn-art. The specific purposes
of this concept include visual communication of work, ideas, plans, and
more.

#### How does it work?

We decided for it to be a plug-in that could be used as a complement for
the work that being done in other digital tools, with the purpose of
replicating the facility and experience of having a notebook for
sketching ideas. The difference within the notebook experience and the
plug-in \"yarte\" would be the support and instant follow up that the
tool will provide to the user, based on the \"context\" given by the
user themselves.

#### What type of collaboration is it made for?

With this approach to the digital tools, we found the potential for this
facility of creation to become a collaborative environment in the open
platform for people to test-advertise their artwork as NFT\'s in order
to have access to the statistic that would be proof & reference of the
usage and audience that their work reaches.

The value of these scheme is in the value of data and previous
experience in the current professional work career building, especially
in the art and creative fields.

#### How did we came up with this idea?

After the workshop week, all the students from EKA formed a team in
order to gather a more integral research on the topic of the digital
tools that are part of our everyday life. This helped us to identify
what are the interfaces, interaction & practices that had an area of
opportunity to be improved. During our research upon the existing
digital tools, and more specifically about the most popular ones, we
found interesting & defining quotes and statements on the comments,
reviews and websites on those. These findings led us to establish our
own conclusions between the popular opinion and our own experience and
expectation when using digital tools for creativity and & or for
collaboration.

{% image "yarte!_3.jpg", "Ideation to understand the most standard tools part of our daily life", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Mindmap on creative work and experimentation</figcaption>

In the next stage of our research, we have clarified the differences
between existing tools and identified why not everyone is using the same
ones. These tools offer unique features within the same category, but
who are they specifically designed for? What factors help individuals
decide which tool aligns better with their needs or personal
identification?

Among a variety of answers, additional questions, and conclusions, we
have identified a specific difference that distinguishes tools providing
easy access to a world of possibilities (1) from those that replicate
tools for putting one\'s practiced talent or skill into action beyond
the confines of a screen. (2):

-   **(1) corresponds to the \"Accessibility\" category** of digital
    tools, which represents the programs and apps and websites that
    allow one to explore an alien world, far from our real abilities
    and/or possibilities, but very close to our imagination and desires.
    It suggests and facilitate tools that might only be available in the
    digital world, but also regular or analog tools with exponential
    \"power\" or \"capacity\"
-   **(2) is the \"Possibilities\" category**, which addresses tools,
    programs, apps, and websites that offer specific functionalities
    replicating high-fidelity analog tools. These tools facilitate the
    user\'s capability to represent desired outcomes with ease through
    the utilization of screens, while also granting access to a diverse
    range of digital tools.

{% image "yarte!_5.jpg", "Ideation to understand the most standard tools part of our daily life", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>How to understand the range between Accessibility and Possibilities in digital tools experience </figcaption>

As shown in the map above, we have identified a common point for both
categories, which is the need for experience. However, the two
categories are driven by distinct motivations and strengths: Instinct
and Abilities.

We concluded that experience is equally applied in both cases, yet in
different forms (instinct and ability). Furthermore, we identified that
intuition serves as the driving force that motivates users to continue
using or experimenting with the tools, facilitating the acquisition of
expertise and knowledge in specific digital environments or toolsets.

While identifying these two approaches to creativity in the digital
world, we realized that despite its potential for providing
possibilities, it can also be limiting for inexperienced users. The
instinct we mentioned earlier can only exist and be effective when one
has had the opportunity to gain experience within specific environments.

However, what about the people who would like to explore untapped
abilities that they believe they possess or wish to acquire? Joining the
digital world is no longer only an option or an alternative. For sure,
certain aspects can and should be preserved in analog and physical
experiences, yet digital tools should support and enhance how we
represent our ideas and enable the easy distribution of messages
worldwide in today's interconnected age.

That is why we chose to focus on this question: "What happens when the
references that most digital tools are built upon do not align with your
own experiences or references?" Not identifying with a particular world
does not mean that our instinct will be turned off when faced with
mismatched references and archives. Instead, it will operate based on
the possibilities it has been exposed to and execute accordingly.

We found some other examples that highlight the role of references and
instinct in executing creative plans or ideas. These can be children\'s
coloring books, fashion game magazines, architectural exercises and
games as well as certain products that provide a starting point for an
idea and facilitate users in generating complementary ideas. In other
words, these examples help users in overcoming the anxiety of starting
from a blank page. Indeed, we observed that when a contextual starting
point is given, engagement becomes more natural and works as an engine
or motor for the references in our minds to start constructing and
creating.

One popular example that perfectly illustrates this concept is the game
Minecraft. Its most distinguishing characteristic is the balance between
exploration and freedom, allowing players to set their own goals each
time they play. The game provides a contextual world, and it is up to
the player to decide what they need from it or what they want to add to
it. Furthermore, Minecraft offers a creative mode that serves as a tool
for creating compatible and ideal pieces for each environment. This mode
not only grants accessibility to the creation process but also offers
flexibility for personalization and editing whenever desired.

After deconstructing this successful example, it became easier to
identify numerous other domains that embody a similar philosophy with a
wide range of applications. One such example is the \'text\' tool, which
is integrated into various independent apps. It assists users by
providing placeholder text known as \'Lorem Ipsum,\' demonstrating the
visual form of a text box without relying on meaningful content. Another
example that stood out during our process is the Google Images
tool/option. By simply inputting a word or a sentence (context), it
generates images that align with the given starting point. This feature
opens the door to endless possibilities, as each image selected leads to
Google Images suggesting and displaying more similar or related images.

### curious.me

##### Vanessa SIGG & Yannick HOFFMEISTER (HfG)

> How to get the user out of their "bubble" and arouse their curiosity?


#### Why is this tool for?

Curious.me is a mobile app designed to arouse and encourage curiosity, a
quality that is often lost by daily stress, lack of time, and various
other factors. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic further exacerbates
this issue as many people miss out on the exchange with others while
working from home, resulting in a lack of new impressions and
inspiration. curious.me offers the user a wealth of articles on
interesting topics and the opportunity to delve deeper into the topics.
Value is placed on getting the user out of his "bubble" and offering him
topics that he has hardly or not at all dealt with before. This ensures
new stimuli and areas of interest, and thus the chance to arouse
curiosity.

#### Who is this tool for?

curious.me is primarily intended to help creative people and people
working in creative areas to get new impressions and inspiration for
future projects. However, since curiosity can be aroused in everyone and
the range of topics is very wide, the app is also suitable for the
general public.

#### How does it work?

Curious.me encourages curiosity by presenting users with solvable tasks.
When users find a topic or solution that interests them, they can
satisfy their curiosity and delve into the associated subject.
Statistics also give insights into the topics that users have dealt with
the most, offering a glimpse into their own interests.curious.me
features:

-   **Articles:** curious.me offers a variety of articles to browse
    through at will. A brief introduction to the topic, tags, a headline
    and attractive images convey the first impression of the article on
    offer. If interested, the article can be read in its entirety and
    further articles related to the overarching topic can be read via
    endless scrolling.

{% image "curious_article.png", "Example of an article proposed by the *curious.me* mobile app", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Example of an article proposed by the *curious.me* mobile app</figcaption>

-   **Tasks:** When you open curious.me for the first time each day, you
    are greeted with a question or task designed to pique your curiosity
    about a specific topic. These may include estimation questions or
    other engaging tasks aimed at generating interest in the subject
    matter. After answering the question, you are presented with the
    corresponding article for reading. However, if you prefer, you also
    have the option to skip the article and proceed to the normal
    article view.

{% image "curious_tasks.png", "Curious.me propose a task or a question to start the day", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Curious.me propose a task or a question to start the day</figcaption>

-   **Library:** If an article is interesting and you would like to be
    able to look at it again later, or if you don\'t have time at the
    moment but are curious about an article, the article can be saved in
    your personal library. Articles can also be organized by assigning
    folders to them.

{% image "curious_library.png", "You can read article later in the library section of the app", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>You can read article later in the library section of the app</figcaption>

-   **Dashboard:** The dashboard provides information about which topics
    have aroused the most interest and how diligently you have used the
    app. The tasks can also be found and called up here. There are also
    evaluations for these. Another option found here is the ability to
    submit articles that you think are good and useful.

{% image "curious_dashboard.png", "The dashboard section provides information about topics", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>The dashboard section provides information about topics</figcaption>

### Mosaic

##### Lucie WITTMER & Thang NGUYEN (HfG)

> Why not be creative together?


#### Why is this tool for?

MOSAIC is a collaboration tool for artists to work together on creative
projects. This is to simplify working remotely in agencies and with
other artists around the world and combine multiple workspaces into one.

Isolation Kills Creativity: a lot of artists, especially illustrators,
work very isolated and the pandemic has made this issue even more
severe. In times like these we are lacking outside influences and
inspiration from others.

MOSAIC brings community back into remote work and allows for agencies
and independent illustrators to create their own illustrations together.
In its focus stand communication and collaboration, which make the users
feel close to their colleagues, even if they are worlds apart. Working
with artists around the world gives the opportunity to explore new art
styles and combine them in one artwork. The goal for this tool was also
to make interdisciplinary work possible, by including animators or
authors into the project.

#### Who is this tool for?

MOSAIC is made for isolated artists and designer (especially for
illustrators).

#### How does it work?

In the drawing tool itself the users will find all the tools they need
for creating illustrations:

{% image "mosaic_1_menu.png", "Menu for the *Mosaic* tools", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Menu for the *Mosaic* tools </figcaption>

As well as other special features that allow for easier communication,
such as a voice chat or the option to ask your colleagues for advice on
an artwork. These collaborative features separate MOSAIC from your
ordinary drawing tool like Procreate, Illustrator or Photoshop.

{% image "mosaic_2_warmup.png", "Differents mockups of the *Mosaic* interface ", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "mosaic_3_boards.png", "Differents mockups of the *Mosaic* interface ", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "mosaic_4_observation.png", "Differents mockups of the *Mosaic* interface ", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "mosaic_5_changes.png", "Differents mockups of the *Mosaic* interface ", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "mosaic_6_notes.png", "Differents mockups of the *Mosaic* interface ", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "mosaic_7_communitypage.png", "Differents mockups of the *Mosaic* interface ", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Differents mockups of the *Mosaic* interface </figcaption>


### reflect.it

##### Bianca TILLMANN & Luis PFLÜGER (HfG)

> We don't learn from experience; we learn from reflecting our
experiences.

#### Who is this tool for?

reflect.it is a cross platform tool for reflection at work. You can
reflect your work on your own, or in a team. You can also use reflect.it
to check in and out of work.

#### How does it work?

To document your thoughts, you can write down notes for every question.
Choosing between multiple categories gives you exactly the questions you
want.

To make check ins and outs and retrospectives in a team easier, you can
use the reflect.it zoom plugin. By discussing the questions together,
team communication can be improved.

Every time you reflect on your own, reflect.it will ask you about your
current mood. The data gained from these assessments is then used to
show you statistics about your mood history, your average day and your
average week. These statistics are useful to analyze how your work makes
you feel and to find the specific reasons for especially good or bad
moods.

#### What type of collaboration is it made for?

We aimed to create a tool that every person working in front of a screen
can use to reflect their work and create a healthier work environment
and better work habits.

#### How did we came up with this idea?

Reflection is one of the most important skills to have, but it's
especially important in the workplace. It can help us understand and
improve our own behavior, way of working and skills. While most of us
are aware of the importance of reflection, we rarely take the time to
ponder our feelings, thoughts and actions and to analyze them.

### Illustration protocols with Free Softwares

##### Adrien DELIMARD, Heloïse DEBRAND, Manon PICAT, Mathias HU & Samantha ZANNONI (Esadse)

#### Short presentation of the project : how did we came up with that idea?

Free culture (social movement, subculture, philosophy) is largely
derived from free software, but is much broader and includes other
aspects (music, food, movies). It promotes certain beliefs such as the
fact that knowledge and learning should be available to all, that no
entity should dominate others. It induces a form of horizontality by
distributing power among the members of the community. There is an
asymmetrical relationship between the engineer who designs, who owns the
knowledge, and the user who uses, does not know, and is potentially
used. We feel the need to reclaim the tools, to understand them and to
regain sovereignty over them.

#### Why is this tool for?

To research and share software used in the school, interviewing
administration, faculty and technicians to gather information, then
organizing the collected data accordingly.

#### How does it work?

We are conducting an investigation on how the school system integrates
digital tools like Adobe. We are particularly interested in
understanding how these tools have been "forced" into our studies from
the beginning. As part of our research, we will be giving short weekly
presentations on the topics we find intriguing. Additionally, we plan to
explore collaborative tools and processes to enhance our learning
experience together.

#### What type of collaboration is it made for?

We would like to invite other students or professionals in the field of
Arts and Design, in which we evolve, who use standardized software, to
take a step back, to ask themselves questions, to look beyond their
interfaces, to be aware of what they are using to become full actors of
their digital creation experiences. Autonomous and independent
professionals, an ideal that, like any utopia, cannot be fully realized.

#### How did we came up with this idea?

Questioning changing priorities: While companies are often expected to
avoid mistakes, it is worth noting that some of the most surprising
achievements can arise from those very mistakes.

{% image "exp_2022-01-26_20.38.28.png", "Screenshot of multiple experiences with collaborative drawing app from free software community", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "exp_2022-01-26_20.39.54.png", "Screenshot of multiple experiences with collaborative drawing app from free software community", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "exp_2022-01-26_20.43.38.png", "Screenshot of multiple experiences with collaborative drawing app from free software community", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "exp_2022-01-26_20.56.50.png", "Screenshot of multiple experiences with collaborative drawing app from free software community", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "exp_2022-01-26_20.57.13.png", "Screenshot of multiple experiences with collaborative drawing app from free software community", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "exp_2022-01-26_21.03.20.png", "Screenshot of multiple experiences with collaborative drawing app from free software community", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "exp_2022-01-26_21.03.29.png", "Screenshot of multiple experiences with collaborative drawing app from free software community", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "exp_2022-01-26_21.03.37.png", "Screenshot of multiple experiences with collaborative drawing app from free software community", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Screenshot of multiple experiences with collaborative drawing app from free software community</figcaption>

### Collective digital illustration protocols

#### Wave of specialists

Participants in the project will each choose a digital drawing tool of
their choice. They will also choose and/or design one or more digital
formats to experiment with during the drawing process. Participants must
agree on the number of colors or shades of gray that can be used and the
choice of the background color.

The participants divide up the roles in the following order:

-   The \'contour designer(s)\': One or more individuals draw several
    imprecise shapes for the figure drawer(s) to refine.
-   The \'figure drawer(s)\': One or more individuals transform the
    shapes into figures.
-   The \'shade and contrast designer(s)\': One or more individuals
    handle colors and contrasts.
-    The \'detail designer(s)\': One or more individuals add graphic
    details such as patterns, textures, gradients, etc.

The participants agree on the export and the final format of the
composition. It is possible to double the roles by assigning the
decoration to one group and the characters to another.

#### Rumor of a sentence

-   Each participant uses the digital medium of their choice to draw.
-   Participants decide together the order in which they will draw.
-   One of the participants opens a book to any page and reads the first
    sentence they find.
-   From this sentence, the first participant will draw a picture for 5
    minutes.
-   The first participant sends their drawing to the second participant,
    who will reproduce or modify it loyal to original in 5 minutes on
    their format before sending it to the next participant, so on until
    the last participant.
-   Participants design a composition by combining their drawing, the
    signatures of each participant and the original sentence using an
    online sharing tool or by designating a member of the group to share
    their screen and manipulate the elements. 

#### Talking drawing

Participants choose whether or not to time themselves. Participants form
groups of four. The roles to be distributed are the draftsman, the
colorist, the graphic designer and the writer. Together, they choose a
medium and a format and take turns. The order is determined by the team.

-   The designer draws the elements of the composition.
-   The colorist takes care of the color and textures.
-   The graphic designer prepares a text area.
-   The writer chooses one or more typefaces and writes a text related
    to the image.

The groups present their work to the others and choose to put them
together or a way to present them that distinguishes them. It would be
interesting to reverse the order and see the effect. It is possible to
combine the tasks and form groups of two.

#### Cycles

One participant performs a trace. Another participant performs another
one, close to the first one. The operation is repeated until all
participants feel that the traces form a satisfactory and
well-structured composition. Variation(s): Participants can choose to
move or distort elements rather than draw. The protocol can be performed
without using speech.

#### Chewable Fictions

Participants determine a running order by drawing lots, alphabetical
order, \"plopping\" or any other possible technique.\
The first participant represents a scene including a setting, a
character and an action. Following the direction of play, the next
participant represents the next scene. The protocol ends when a
participant concludes the story. The participants give a title to this
story.

#### Mise en abyme

Participants determine the order of passage using various techniques
like drawing lots, alphabetical order, using a counting-out game or
other methods. All participants choose a common area and zoom in to the
maximum. The first participant begins by drawing within the zoomed-in
area. The second participant then zooms out slightly and incorporates
the first participant\'s drawing into their own.

This process continues as each subsequent participant zooms out slightly
and adds their contribution, including the previous realizations. The
action repeats until the zoom out is exhausted. As a variation,
participants can try completing the activity within a specified time
limit.

#### I write a drawing

Participants take turns writing a sentence on the page. The sentences do
not necessarily have to be logical. Each participant deconstructs the
sentence of the previous participant in order to compose an
illustration.\
The participants give one or more titles to the final compositions.
Alternatives: It is possible to allow the distortion of lines, the
creation of new drawings after their destructuring or to limit the time.

One sentence less, one drawing more.

### Graphic Jam

##### Hugo SAKSIK (Esadse)

> How to transcribe the communication experience of local multiplayer
video games into a graphic design context?

{% image "hugo_midsize.jpg", "Set up for the Graphic Jam experimental app for collaborative graphic design", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "hugo_clefs-opti.png", "Set up for the Graphic Jam experimental app for collaborative graphic design", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Set up for the Graphic Jam experimental app for collaborative graphic design </figcaption>

#### Why is this tool for?

While contemporary digital collaboration design often focuses on remote
communication, Graphic Jam proposes to transform the computer back into
a machine which physically brings people together. It transcribes the
communication experience of local multiplayer video games into a graphic
design context.

I envision a few use cases for this tool:

-   **A jam tool for graphic designers**: As the entire process of
    creating a graphic is a very \"hands-on\" approach, interesting
    results can be created quite quickly. It can be used as a kind of
    warm up tool for fueling new ideas in an informal and fun setting.
-   **An installation displayed in an exhibition context:** The way of
    generating graphics and posters with the tool is a straight-forward
    process and is a nice for giving a public insight into a graphic
    design process and the effects of experimenting with shapes, colors,
    fonts, images, superpositions\...

#### Who is this tool for?

Graphic Jam is both made for graphic designers (experts) and for the
public (non-experts) to learn the basis of graphic design process
through experimentation.


#### How does it work?

Developed with Processing, the graphic generator features a vector
editor based on bezier curves, a bitmap editor and a font editor. This
software must be simultaneously operated by two people using gamepads,
as the graphic functions require cooperation and communication in order
to unleash their full potential. The tactile approach leads to an
instinctive workflow as well as happy accidents and therefore,
interesting visuals results emerge swiftly straight from the first jam.

**Shape editor:** The first \"tool\" or experiment that I developed is a
shape editor based on bezier curves. The nature of the design of
traditional computer input peripherals, such as keyboards, is to be used
by one individual. Even if we manage to squeeze in front of the computer
in order to use one keyboard simultaneously, we certainly can\'t do the
same thing for only one mouse. As a result, it was an evident choice to
me to apply a gamepad as a means to control my tool. Several can be
plugged in at the same time on a computer, and they allow a variety of
input values, which are useful for moving items on a screen.
Consequently, I used two gamepads for the conception of this tool.
Concerning the bezier editor, one joystick of each controller is mapped
to control the anchor point of a bezier curve, whereas the second
joystick controls the magnet point of the curve. Then, a timer of ten
seconds sets off and is repeated in a loop: each time the timer reaches
0, the curve that is currently being edited stays in place, \"printed\"
on our canvas, and a new curve controlled by the users appears. The idea
for introducing a timer system was inspired by the video game
[WarioWare](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WarioWare:_Smooth_Moves), and
aims at enhancing verbal communication between the users, which proves
to be necessary in a fast-paced drawing context. It is also intended as
an experiment investigating how this time and drawing constraint can
potentially produce interesting shapes, similar to applications
demonstrated here [Constraint Systems](https://constraint.systems/). The
minimalist grid-based aesthetic was inspired by the image processing
tool [Ronin](https://100r.co/site/ronin.html).

{% image "hugo_bezier1.png", "Screenshot of the Shape editor", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Screenshot of the Shape editor</figcaption>

**Bitmap editor:** Further pursuing these synchronous local experiments,
I created a simple bitmap editor. It allows copying and pasting specific
parts of a picture. Each user can control a cursor on the canvas,
defining an area which can then be copied with the triggers, moved
around, resized, and pasted. After conceiving these two tools, it was
necessary to assemble and place them into a fitting framework. Once
merged, shapes drawn with bezier curves can be pasted on images with two
blending modes. I realized throughout the project that I found the
aspect of being able to generate quick visuals and posters to be even
more interesting than creating independent graphic tools, which is why I
decided to lose the timer after all. However, I added a button to
\"print\" the curves more freely. Additionally, I added further
parameters for altering the curves, such as the stroke cap shape, the
width, color and saturation of the curve.

{% image "hugo_bitmap3.png", "Screenshot of the Bitmap editor", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Screenshot of the Bitmap editor</figcaption>

**Font editor:** The final tool I added to my poster generator was a
font editor. It has two modes: a writing mode, allowing to input text,
and a deformation mode. The deformation mode works by cutting the text
in small parts and rearranging them on a grid. Users can then modify the
size of the grid, the type and strength of the deformation, switch
between different fonts, and duplicate a non-deformed layer of the text.
By quickly switching though and playing with the parameters, variations
on the base font can be generated. Alternatively, a nonreadable texture
may be generated which can be blended in the bitmap mode.

{% image "hugo_font1.png", "Screenshots of the Font editor", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "hugo_font2.png", "Screenshots of the Font editor", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "hugo_font3.png", "Screenshots of the Font editor", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}

{% image "hugo_font4.png", "Screenshots of the Font editor", "(min-width: 30em) 50vw, 100vw" %}
<figcaption>Screenshots of the Font editor</figcaption>

#### What type of collaboration is it made for?

Local mode real-time collaboration.

#### How did I came up with this idea?

The origin of this project is the observation that nowadays, most of the
digital design propositions for collaboration focus on remote
collaboration. This is true for productivity softwares, but also in the
field of videogames. Most games propose many features in an online
multiplayer context, but often no local mode. However, I have some very
fond memories of playing video games with friends on a video game
device. During these occasions, a special connection is built between
players, as they act together on the gaming device and turning the
computer into a social machine that brings people together. The project
I have been working on aims at bringing these special moments back into
our contemporary relationship with computers, and in this case within
the context of graphic design processes.

### Conclusion of this step

The post-workshop ideas quickly evolved into more concrete projects,
sometimes very specific, as devices, plugins, applications, or more
experimental proposals. It is interesting to notice that each of them
integrated the specificities of our pedagogical programs both into their
proposals and by the way they were presented. It was also a way to
introduce ourselves through projects. This important step in the project
allowed us to build the foundations of a sustained and solid
collaboration, a common ground, to pursue our work.

We had underestimated the importance of a longer preparation in situ,
with people and without communication apps but the pandemic was still
there, and we did as we were allowed to under the circumstances. Yet, we
anticipated quite well the necessity to document everything, to produce
a lot of texts and images that would allow us later to come back on the
multiple evolutions of our work together and to learn from it.
