---
layout: page
tags: chapitre

eleventyNavigation:
  key: Methodologies and tools
  order: 2
---

# Methodologies and Tools for Collaboration

Tools allow us to practice, while practicing allows us to build these
tools. The artist and designer community, who have a keen interest in
digital practices, has been utilizing this recipe for quite some time
now. At Saint-Etienne Higher School of Art and Design, our pedagogy is
based on this principle. Since the very beginning, we've had plenty
exchanges with our students regarding the use of these tools. The
integration of communication, sharing and design tools into our creative
practices has had a significant impact on the way we approach and
express our creativity. This project has displayed the varying degrees
to which each team, school and country cultivates its unique culture of
relationships with technology, particularly with digital technology.

It is indeed a struggle to distance ourselves from these topics: As
professionals, students, and teachers, we find ourselves entangled in
socio-politico-economic systems that our practices actively participate
in. Addressing these fundamental questions becomes crucial for shaping
the future, especially amidst the climate and political challenges that
lie ahead in the upcoming years.

This project which lasted two years, was rich in exchanges and
experiences, and had an indisputable effect on us, especially on our
students: questioning and critical positioning towards our methods and
utilization of digital creative tools through collaborative efforts. It
became clear that tools and methods we impart are not neutral: they are
indeed part of the creative process and have a lot of influence on
projects as well as on students, on the way they work and on their
designs. Our practices encompass a mix of art, hacking, tinkering,
product design as well as the use of both proprietary and free software.
However, each school approaches pedagogy with its own unique
perspective, adapting toolboxes and methods that directly influence the
professional world in which we prepare our students. Within the
framework of the DTCC project, we had the opportunity to voice our
concerns while enabling different approaches to coexist.

Even though we have encountered some challenges in our collaboration,
the encounter of our distinct practices regarding design and teaching
proved to be highly enriching. This project gave us the chance to share
and compare our methodologies and tools -- analyzing their modalities,
origins and realities in our institutions and also in professional
contexts, while allowing students to think both individually and
collectively about their strengths and weaknesses.
