---
layout: page
tags: article
title: Making exhibitions
url: '/making-exhibitions-as-a-collective-and-pedagogical-practice/'

eleventyNavigation:
  key: Students feedbacks
  parent: Making exhibitions
  order: 1
---

# Students feedbacks as the central piece of the exhibitions

After the last workshop at Hfg, in November 2022, we met to decide on the next steps in our collaborative work. 

At this stage, despite the involvement of our students in all stages of the project, we had not yet documented their feedback and personal reflections on our working subjects. In addition, we didn't feel that the output from the workshops and the work carried out during the courses were sufficient to capture what's at stake in the collaborations, considered as processes that are always in-progress.

Indeed, while the students' productions provide food for thought and formulate proposals concerning collaborative creative tools, we feel that their feedback on our international collaboration and what it generated in terms of questioning tools, positioning practices and the cohabitation of different ways of working, express more explicitly what is at stake in collaborations, through and beyond the technical devices on which they are based on. It seems to us, therefore, that if the students' productions are to be presented at the exhibition, they must necessarily be accompanied by a reflexive form, enabling us to enter into the collaboration itself, beyond the productions that have resulted from it.

To do this, we chose to interview the students. These interviews took the form of videos, an easy-to-exchange format. We decided to ask the students to answer in the language with which they felt most comfortable, and to subtitle them in English and French. We - teachers from the three schools - collaboratively wrote a series of questions that we felt were representative of all the topics covered over two years: 

What are the most interesting aspects of this cooperation between three countries?
What was your biggest surprise during this trip? 
Can you describe the best and/or the worst moments during this workshop or any workshop?
What was the main insight on collaboration during this workshop?
Do you have an anecdote of something you experienced during the project that stuck in your mind?
Was there any remarkable input of one of the project partners or international team members for you?
What does collaboration mean to you? How can it succeed in the digital space? 
What have you learned about digital collaboration during this project? 
How can we enhance creativity in the digital space? Share your insights.
What did you learn from the other partner schools and their approach to design?
Please describe the communication with your international team-mates, how was it for you?
Was the outcome of the workshop week different from the usual school  projects that you are doing at home? 
What did you learn or observe in this project that you will take away for your professional or personal life?
What's next for collaborative creativity?
What would you do to deliberately screw up a collaboration project?
But that would be the same tactic face to face, wouldn't it?
What would you do to save a messy collaboration situation?
What would you bring from digital collaboration into real life?
Can digital collaboration ever be intimate?
What is the point of collaborating with someone who works very differently from you?
Were you able to combine different working methods in your group or did one method take over?
What is interesting about collaborating with someone who works very differently?
What would you bring from digital collaboration into real life?
Do you think tutors in the project should have taken the very different study cultures more into account?
Today I have seen a advertisement for a childrens' magician doing birthday parties.  I asked myself: What would I do if I were the magician and the children didn't like me?  So how would you deal with students in such a situation?
We know that digital spaces may build barriers between people. Where do they offer chances?
We need so much technology to do this interview. Would we have a better exchange with less?
Do you think you learned anything during the pandemic to design for that question?
Is there anything we can do to improve the quality of the creative process in the digital space?
How does it work to get to know someone new in the digital space?

We then submitted them to the students, who each selected three and responded to them on camera. To ensure consistency between our materials, filmed in three different locations, we defined common rules for filming, lighting and temporality. We produced a total of 22 videos, which will feature in each of the exhibitions.

Here is a list of reflections from student interviews that we have tried to summarize and compile here, they are sometimes intriguing and contradictory, out of context, but always rich in learning :

People really wanted to work on the same subject but with a very different point of view.
Differents methods sometimes are incompatible.
Get out of our comfort zone.
Forced to reevaluate our way of thinking and working.
Exchange a lot of ideas in a very short time. 
Find the group cohesion can be complicated.
It's difficult to get a tangible project by the end of the week.
A new understanding of the distinct design methodologies.
It is what we could experience later on in a professional setting.
It's essential to work with people who have a different way of working.
There will be a bright future for creative collaboration.
Digital collaboration is not going to be something very intimate.
It's a question of trust.
It allowed us to gain a lot of self-confidence.
We learned a lot about methods.
Methods and tools are not neutral and shape our way of thinking and our way of working.
We cannot separate the tools and methods.
Collaboration is not an end in itself.
The communication can be natural, each of us proposed ideas, as a ping pong game.
Have good transparency in the process.
In the digital space, you can customize the whole environment.
It's difficult to take this from a business level to a personal level or even to another level.
The emotions disappear quickly.
Misunderstandings have a snowball effect and become bigger because it's harder to communicate clearly.
Sometimes it is difficult to make decisions intuitively.
Listening to my gut feeling again from time to time.
We adjusted a lot through sketches actually.
If you visualize something, you can come to a common understanding much better.
Remote communication is just the same as in real-life, just more complex.
Cooperation is always intimate to some extent.
We've all seen someone's cat run across the screen.
Varying feelings and emotions can be used successfully in group work.
A computer is just a combination of ones and zeros, there is a risk of “over-humanizing” it.

We could evoke here the reversed or reflexive pedagogy.

At this stage, it's the students who ask themselves what they've learned, and what they've appreciated or regretted. In a critical and constructive approach, they give us valuable feedback on their experience, but also on the limits of what we have proposed during these two years of joint work.











### Pour archive, à supprimer plus tard
L'idée initiale d'une exposition itinérante était séduisante mais posait de nombreux problèmes logistiques,  nous avions par ailleurs déjà engagé des recherches chacun de notre côté. 

After the last workshop at the Hfg, in November 2022, we decide to meet and define together what to do with our collaborative work and share it with the world. The initial idea was a travelling exhibition, it was appealing, but a number of logistical problems was here.

À ce stade, malgré l'implication de nos étudiants dans toutes les étapes du projet, nous n'avions pas encore documenté leur retours d'expérience et leur réflexion personnelle sur nos sujets de travail. Par ailleurs, la production des workshops et les travaux réalisés ne nous semblaient pas toujours réellement assez avancés pour être présenté tel quel, ou alors sous la forme d'extrait pour appuyer notre propos.

Despite the involvement of our students in all stages of the project, we did not really documented their feedback and personal reflections on our work topics. We didn't always feel that the work produced during the workshops was sufficiently advanced to be presented as such, but preferably in the form of extracts to support our argument.

Nous avons donc opté pour partagé un matériel commun aux trois expositions que nous allions produire ensemble. 

We choosed to share a common material to three exhibitions in each schools that we were going to produce together. To do this, we chose a video format that was easy to exchange, and that we could translate into English as well as all the languages used by the students.

 Une identité graphique commune maintiendrait la cohérence des supports malgré des scénographies différentes.

We wrote together a series of questions which we felt were representative of all the topics covered over the two years, and submitted them to the students in the style of an interview. A common graphic identity would maintain the coherence of the supports despite the different scenographies.

Après quelques essais, nous avons défini des règles communes de filmage, d'éclairage et de temporalité. Nous avons produit 22 vidéos traduites dans plusieurs langues. Chaque école les a ensuite intégré dans sa scénographie.

After a few runs, we defined common rules for filming, lighting and timing. We produced 22 videos, translated into several languages. Each school integrated them into their scenography.
