---
layout: page
tags: article
title: The meeting of different approaches
url: '/the-meeting-of-different-approaches-to-teaching-digital-art-and-design/'

eleventyNavigation:
  key: The IxD Program in EKA
  parent: Encounter between different approaches
  order: 1
---

## The Pedagogical Approach of the IxD Program in EKA, Tallinn

The Interaction Design (IxD) program at the Estonian Academy of the Arts (EKA) is designed to provide a holistic and hands-on approach to designing relationships between humans,technology, and envrionment. The IxD program at EKA focuses on designing for humans, developing the right attitude, and creating a positive impact on the planet. The program is structured to provide students with the skills and mindset to become problem-solving innovators who can shape the future through their designs. Furthermore, the program is designed to equip students with the necessary skills, knowledge, and experience to become experts in the interaction design field.

Each year, we select twelve people to study at IxDma. The international program provides an opportunity for students to obtain a Master's Degree in interaction design without prior design-related education or experience. Instead, the program welcomes professionals from various fields who are interested in pursuing a career in interaction design. The program's emphasis on diversity is crucial in creating a dynamic and vibrant learning environment where students can learn from each other's unique perspectives and experiences. The program recognizes that interaction design can benefit from a range of perspectives and insights, and therefore values a diverse selection of students.
 
The study curriculum consists of four semesters and the duration of the study period is two years. 
- The first semester focuses on building empathy, a core skill for designers. Students are taught to understand human behavior, values, and attitudes. They learn to conduct user research and identify opportunities for design. Subjects taught during this semester: Introduction to Interaction Design, Service Design, Visual Interaction Design, Design Storytelling, and Design Anthropology.
- The second semester focuses on interactions with technology. Students are taught to build and develop ideas by making them tangible and actionable. They learn to prototype, test, and iterate their designs. Subjects taught during this semester: Tangible Interactions, Design for Digital Innovation, Emotional Design, Practical Business Design, Digital Portfolio Development, and Design in the Changing World.
- The third semester is for reflection and looking into the future. Students are taught to consider the broader impact of their designs beyond human needs, and to adopt a critical mindest in their design projects. Subjects taught during this semester: Design for Social Innovation, Design for Emerging Themes, Immersive Experiences, Facilitation, Speculative Design, and Psychology for Designers.
- The fourth semester is for refining and developing expertise in the student's focus area. Students are asked to prove their maturity as a professional and to develop their portfolios. Subjects taught during this semester: Degree Project, Doing Research in Design, TASE Exhibition (a showcase of the degree projects in the EKA’s annual end-of-year exhibition next to other departments).

The program's focus on sustainable, accessible, inclusive, and conscious products, services, and experiences that reflects the current trends in the design world. Many companies and organizations are now prioritizing these factors in their design processes, recognizing the need to create products and services that meet the needs of a diverse and conscious user base.
The curriculum supports students to understand human behavior, values, and attitudes. By focusing on the human-centered approach, students are taught to build empathy, conduct user research, and develop their understanding of human needs. Students learn to adapt to the constantly evolving world while focusing on humans, technology, and environment.

The IxD program at EKA recognizes that the designer's job description is constantly evolving. Therefore, it focuses on developing the core attributes of a designer, including the right mindset, skillset, and toolset. A designer's personality is critical in shaping their approach to problem-solving. Therefore, the program encourages students to be curious, experimental, and open to failure. They learn to be critical, creative, and meticulous in their designs. The program also instills values of humility, care, and responsibility towards the planet and its inhabitants.

Human-centered design is no longer enough. The IxD program at EKA recognizes that to create a positive future, we must look beyond human needs when designing relationships between humans and technology. The program encourages students to consider the impact of their designs on the planet and it’s inhabitants. Interaction designers have the power to shape human perception, values, and behaviors. The program emphasizes the need to create designs that have a positive impact on the planet.

The IxD program at EKA is experiential and studio-based. Students develop their designer intuition, experience, and portfolio through constant iteration, guided by passionate mentors who bring their experience to guide students through challenging projects. The program is structured around four semesters, each focusing on a different aspect of interaction design.

IxDma is a well-established program that has been providing students with high-quality education and training in interaction design for several years. Over the years, the program has undergone continuous development, with feedback from students and reflections from mentors, making it more innovative and responsive to the changing needs of the industry. The program is committed to providing students with the skills and knowledge they need to succeed in the field of interaction design. To achieve this, the program employs a variety of teaching methods that focus on real-world experience and collaboration with professionals in the industry.

One of the unique features of IxDma is its use of external mentors from a wide range of industries. These mentors are experts in their respective fields and provide valuable insights into the current trends and practices in the world of interaction design. The program believes that mentorship is a critical aspect of education, and by having external mentors, students can gain a broader perspective on the industry and its challenges.
In addition to external mentors, IxDma partners with renowned companies to provide real-life work experience for students. The program engages with these companies and makes them clients for every project, enabling students to work with actual companies and experience a real-life working environment. This approach not only provides students with practical experience but also helps them develop their skills on how to collaborate with others in a professional setting.

Moreover, IxDma believes that education should be innovative and respond to the latest trends and values in the world of interaction design. The program constantly updates its curriculum to keep up with the latest developments in the desgin world, ensuring that students have access to the most relevant and up-to-date information. IxDma is a comprehensive program that provides students with a well-rounded education in interaction design. With its focus on collaboration, real-world experience, and innovation, the program prepares students to succeed in a rapidly evolving industry.

**Jekaterina Suharenko & Tanel Karp**
