---
layout: page
tags: article
title: The meeting of different approaches
url: '/the-meeting-of-different-approaches-to-teaching-digital-art-and-design/'

eleventyNavigation:
  key: Design Pedagogy in HfG
  parent: Encounter between Different Approaches
  order: 2
---

## Design Pedagogy in HfG, Schwäbisch-Gmünd

*"Education is the passport to the future, for tomorrow belongs to those who prepare for it today."* (Malcolm X, 1964)

### Brief History

The roots of the university go back to 1776 when the first predecessor
institution, a drawing school, was founded. In 1860, it was transformed
into a royal college for the then important precious metal industry in
Schwäbisch Gmünd. The influences of the Bauhaus and the Ulm School of
Design (Hochschule für Gestaltung Ulm) are formative both in structure
and orientation for the general teaching approach at the Schwäbisch
Gmünd School of Design

In 1972, the \"University of Applied Sciences for Design\"
(Fachhochschule für Gestaltung), today known as the School of Design
(Hochschule für Gestaltung, or HfG), was established. Prof. Karl
Dittert, as the founding rector, aligned both the name and the
educational concept of the institution, which had previously been
artistically oriented, with the design principles of the Ulm School of
Design. In 2004, bachelor and master programs were introduced as part of
the European Bologna Process, which also resulted in the transformation
of the elective option \"Media Design\" in the visual communication
program into the BA program \"Interaction Design\" in 2007. This was the
first program of its kind in Germany. The emphasis on technological
developments also led to the establishment of the fourth BA Program
\"Internet of Things -- Design of Networked Systems,\" which has now
been renamed \"Digital Product Development\" since 2014.

Today, the university has around 750 students enrolled in five design
programs located on a relatively small campus with five locations. The
most notable location is the historical art nouveau building from 1909,
which previously housed the royal drawing school. The university is the
smallest in the federal state of Baden-Württemberg and exclusively
offers design study programs. It admits approximately 230 students each
year into its bachelor programs. These programs are primarily
project-oriented and taught in small student groups of around 15 to 20
students per course.

### Bauhaus, Ulm School of Design

The dynamism and creative power of HfG stem from maintaining a delicate
balance between current scientific, social, and economic developments
and the continuous tradition that underlies the university. This
tradition is deeply influenced by the teaching methodologies of the
Bauhaus and, in particular, the Ulm School of Design. The founders of
the Bauhaus responded to a profound societal and cultural change brought
about by industrialization, which transformed everyday lives on an
unprecedented scale. They believed that in the pursuit of productivity,
we had lost touch with art, humanity, and nature. The Bauhaus sought to
rectify this by translating mere objects into artistic creations that
fostered more human connections. They emphasized the interconnectedness
of form and function, teaching that both aspects are integral to design.

After the atrocities of World War II, the founders of the Ulm School of
Design (HfG Ulm) strongly believed that design, as a rational approach
to problem-solving rather than solely artistic expression, was necessary
to address the humanitarian, political, and factual devastations caused
by the war. They recognized that design could have a positive impact on
society. The Ulm School of Design, along with the Bauhaus, played a
pivotal role in transferring methodologies from the sciences to design,
introducing system thinking and emphasizing sustainability. Ulm
represented a paradigm shift for design in Europe. Both institutions,
especially Ulm, continue to influence the direction of design education
in Schwäbisch Gmünd and reflect HfG\'s steadfast belief in the
transformative power of education and the importance of preparing
students for future challenges.

A century after the Bauhaus, industrialization has given way to
digitization, profoundly impacting everyday lives. Design has moved
beyond tangible objects to encompass intangible elements. It now
encompasses not only the physical products we create and use but also
their interfaces, logic, social implications, and societal impact. The
ecological consequences of mass production remain a pressing concern,
and design is now also involved in mass-producing emotions at an
unprecedented scale. Design shapes digital experiences that reach
millions of people, engaging and eliciting reactions. Manufacturing
these experiences has a profound effect on society, offering vast
opportunities to empower, connect, motivate, and enlighten. However,
like all technologies, it can also have unintended consequences that
create harm, isolation, fear, and doubt. Design now extends into
behavioral science, as designers have the ability to influence these
experiences and, therefore, society and humanity at a large scale.

### Design as interconnected discipline

HfG holds a deep-rooted belief that design, as a discipline, encompasses
scientific, social, and technical aspects and should actively contribute
to shaping cultural, technical, and economic advancements in a
responsible and sustainable manner. Unlike many other design schools,
HfG intentionally diverges from placing excessive emphasis on artistic
or artisanal prerequisites in the teaching of design fundamentals.
Instead, all five study programs at HfG prioritize imparting scientific
knowledge and fostering rational decision-making skills to justify
design choices.

### Systematic basic training

One of the defining characteristics of HfG is its intensive and
interdisciplinary approach to fundamental training. This comprehensive
training establishes the foundation for the following specific
curricular model of the respective design programs, ensuring a
consistent quality of design studies. During this phase, students are
equipped with a reliable repertoire of methods, develop a sense of
formal aesthetics, and learn various techniques. They delve into the
principles governing surface and space, light and color, as well as time
and movement. This systematic study of design fundamentals prepares
students for future design challenges and aims to enhance their
problem-solving competence.

The teaching concept at HfG is designed holistically, incorporating a
combination of coherent teaching programs, self-determined learning,
practical relevance, international orientation, and collaborations with
other institutions and, when appropriate, companies. The aim is to
foster curiosity, inquisitiveness, and methodical thinking among
students while also strengthening their social and intercultural skills.
HfG tries to encourage an open culture of discussion between students
and lecturers, creating an atmosphere of intellectual exchange and
exploration.

Following the initial three semesters of basic studies, students at HfG
have the opportunity to work on projects aligned with their individual
interests and passions. In addition to engaging in effective individual
case studies, all teaching programs emphasize the development of
solution-oriented principles to address identified problems. This
approach showcases the model character of the projects and serves as a
valuable demonstration for future design tasks.

HfG believes that critical-methodical thinking, theoretical backgrounds,
and practical skills are interconnected and essential for the growth and
development of well-rounded designers.

### Teamwork

HfG places a strong emphasis on group projects rather than personal
projects, with a focus on developing solutions through the
identification and understanding of problems. The university prioritizes
rational decision-making over artistic exploration, while maintaining a
critical stance towards the influence of big tech and big money,
striving to strike a balance between the utilization of technology and
the ethical implications associated with it.

The pedagogic concept at HfG is rooted in the belief that design has the
potential to improve human living conditions, regardless of the scale or
scope of projects. This core belief drives the university\'s commitment
to responsible and impactful design practices.

### Rationality

HfG recognizes the significance of scientific principles in design. By
integrating scientific, social, and technical aspects into the
curriculum, HfG adopts a rational and systematic approach to design
education. The university acknowledges that design is not solely an
artistic endeavor but a discipline that requires a comprehensive
understanding of underlying scientific foundations and technological
concepts. Through the imparting of scientific knowledge and the
promotion of rational decision-making, HfG aims to equip its students
with the necessary tools to navigate the complexities of the design
landscape.

### Method-based critical thinking

The teaching concept at HfG is designed to foster intellectual
curiosity, methodical thinking, and interdisciplinary collaboration.
Students are encouraged to engage in critical discourse, explore
different perspectives, and challenge established norms. The open
culture of discussion with lecturers creates an environment that
nurtures intellectual growth and encourages students to develop their
own design philosophies.

### Real-world-projects to address real-world problems

Through project-based learning, students at HfG gain hands-on experience
in tackling real-world design challenges. The emphasis on identifying
and understanding problems ensures that students develop a deep
understanding of user needs and societal contexts. By focusing on
solution-oriented design principles, students are empowered to create
innovative and meaningful solutions that address the pressing issues of
our time.

### Interaction Design

One distinctive program at HfG is the discipline of Interaction Design.
It positions itself at the intersection of design, psychology,
mechanical engineering, and computer science. HfG recognizes that
designing exceptional products requires not only a solid understanding
of design principles but also the ability to effectively communicate
with specialists from mechanical engineering and computer science.
Consequently, the Interaction Design program provides students with
insights into digital technology and programming, albeit only to the
extent necessary for the design process.

The curriculum of the Interaction Design program encompasses a wide
range of topics, including software interfaces, machine and device
controls, internet applications, information systems, and the
utilization of the latest technologies. The program goes beyond the
realm of developing mobile apps, as interaction designers are needed
wherever new digital technologies emerge. HfG acknowledges that
technology alone does not guarantee a successful product. Instead, it
emphasizes the importance of innovative ideas and coherent design in
creating useful applications that are both easy and enjoyable to use.
This user-centric approach is the overarching goal of the Interaction
Design program.

### Design contributing to society, pro technology

HfG\'s approach to education is rooted in its belief in the
transformative power of design. The university recognizes the need for
responsible and sustainable design practices that contribute positively
to society. By instilling a critical stance towards the influence of big
tech and big money, HfG encourages students to consider the ethical
implications of their design decisions. The university strives to create
designers who are conscious of the social, cultural, and environmental
impact of their work, working towards bettering human living conditions
in various domains.

**Marc Guntow**
