---
layout: page
tags: article
title: The meeting of different approaches
url: '/the-meeting-of-different-approaches-to-teaching-digital-art-and-design/'

eleventyNavigation:
  key: Teaching Digital Art and Design
  parent: Encounter between different approaches
  order: 3
---

## Teaching Digital Art and Design: Some reflections based on the pedagogy developed in ESADSE (Saint-Etienne Higher School of Art and Design)

From the 1980s onwards, adapting to the transformations of Western
society, certain French art schools have incorporated the question of
digital technology into their teachings. Firstly, through the
acquisition of technical equipment, typically dedicated to video and
graphic design, and then through the widespread adoption of \"computer
rooms\" which, particularly in the 1990s, allowed for the training of
entire classes on specific software while also providing access to the
Internet. This was followed by the establishment of \"digital hubs\"
designed to manage the educational computer infrastructure while also
providing opportunities for initiations, particularly in the field of
electronics. Then, around 2010, certain institutions, inspired by
fablabs, were equipped with tools such as 3D printers, laser cutters,
and various computer-controlled machines - which are still widely used
today - in addition to more \"digitally-based\" tools such as VR
headsets.

The integration of the digital world into art and design schools has
been accompanied by exceptional technical instruction, enabling students
to achieve mastery of the tools within the unique framework of
personalized pedagogy that characterizes art and design education.

However, in retrospect, it becomes evident that the formal and
theoretical approach to the digital world has not always been adequately
addressed during these decades, creating a significant bias in the
education provided by French art schools. This bias involves considering
the digital domain solely from a technical perspective, regarding it
merely as a tool serving traditional practices without fundamentally
questioning the transformative changes it entails. The new means of
expression, along with the conceptual, aesthetic, performative,
cultural, societal, and political aspects associated with them, have
often been neglected, if not hindered or overshadowed by a necessary but
limiting technical learning process. This technical focus, while
essential, fails to fully represent the entirety of the challenges
presented by digital creation.

However, this criticism should be approached with greater nuance and
subtlety. It is known that art schools are shaped by the trends driven
by successive management and teaching teams. Digital \"moments\" have
indeed emerged in certain institutions, only to fade away due to changes
in direction. The recent initiative Openschool.art (note or reference),
which invites \"digital\" teachers in art schools to share the diversity
of their practices during regular meetings, demonstrates that the
\"digital\" domain, while acknowledged and integrated into contemporary
practices from a technical standpoint, still needs to prove or reaffirm
its legitimacy as a \"medium\" or \"artistic language\" despite decades
of existence.

ESAD Saint-Étienne is one of the institutions that have succeeded in
consistently integrating a digital \"mindset,\" which has evolved over
time but remains persistent. The recent establishment of the \"Digital
Creation\" program highlights the distinctiveness of digital expression,
setting it apart from more traditional conceptual approaches in design
and art. The objective is to educate creators who go beyond being mere
users of tools and become conscious actors aware of the possibilities
offered by digital technology, while also taking into account the
societal and environmental implications inherent in such productions.

However, this essential objective, once stated, does not provide a
singular path to follow. The paths to achieve this goal are numerous and
marked by numerous questions. During the first session of the
Openschool.art meetings, we compiled a list of questions to fuel
discussions. Without reproducing them in their entirety here, these
lines of inquiry form a problematic foundation that remains relevant at
the time of writing this text. The fundamental questions can be
summarized as follows: Are there specific elements inherent to digital
creation? Does declaring oneself as a \"digital artist\" or \"digital
designer\" hold any significance?

And if we develop it further:

What are the \"best practices\" in digital technology that should be
taught to art and design students? Is there an essential digital
cultural background to transmit? Does teaching digital design go hand in
hand with teaching specific tools? Does using software or digital
production tools (such as laser cutting or 3D printing) in a project
make it a digital project? Can original and creative work be created
using proprietary software? Is peer learning the most effective method
for mastering digital tools? Can digital creation training be devolved
to tutorials?

Amidst this array of questions, we can identify inquiries related to the
transmission of knowledge (practical, cultural, methodological), the
relevance of learning tools, and the renewal of pedagogical techniques.
Without aiming to provide definitive answers in the following lines, we
will simply attempt to shed light on certain points based on acquired
experience and current observations. After briefly recalling the
specific teaching context at ESADSE, we will clarify the chosen position
within the \"Digital Creation\" program - namely, an approach focused on
\"creation\" - and then emphasize the importance of advocating for a
distinct \"writing\" as a key element of contemporary digital creation.

### Context of Digital Education at ESAD Saint-Étienne

Starting from the 1980s, technical courses as well as artistic and
theoretical teachings have established a \"digital culture\" within ESAD
Saint-Étienne. As early as 1982, artist Gilles Roussi, later joined by
economist Yann Moulier-Boutang, spread the FLOSS (Free/Libre and Open
Source Software) culture within the institution, supporting, among other
things, the creation of a student association called \"Le Garage,\"
which became a pioneering hub for debates and initiatives in the field
of "open-source". In 2008, the arrival of designer François Brument
within the school sparked a new dynamic around digital design and
parametric design, which is still carried by the current team. In 2010,
the establishment of the Random() laboratory, which enables the
development of experimental digital projects and provides post-master
level opportunities for students, contributed to integrating research
aspects into the digital creation challenges of the institution. At a
later stage, Random() was associated with the Labo NRV of ENSBA Lyon
through a partnership agreement to create the Digital Research Unit in
Art and Design of ESADSE-ENSBA Lyon (a research laboratory that we
unfortunately don\'t have enough space to describe in detail here).

In 2014, the introduction of the \"Media\" department (graphic design
and digital) within the Design master\'s program at ESADSE was another
milestone. It was replaced in 2021 by two departments, one of which is
titled \"Digital Creation\" (an autonomous syllabus separated from
graphic design with the intention of being open to all forms of
practice, including artistic). This transformation clearly demonstrates
the the institution\'s commitment to digital practices as inherent to
contemporary art and design.

In terms of the \"Digital Creation\" department, and the the Random()
lab rely on a permanent team capable of addressing technical,
methodological, artistic, and theoretical questions. The team includes
Damien Bais, François Brument, Jérémie Nuel, Jacques-Daniel Pillon, and
Lucile Schrenzel. They are supported by a technician responsible for
machine maintenance, Smaïl Khellouf. The department and the lab have
access to the resources of school\'s digital department as well as their
own equipment. The machinery is designed to provide a range of diverse
tools, including 3D printing (including ceramic printing), laser
cutting, plotters, robotic arms, and more. It also involves interfaces
such as electronic prototyping platforms, various sensors, VR headsets,
graphic tablets, and exhibition devices such as screens, projectors, and
the MireOS software.

### The \"creation-oriented\" approach of the \"Digital Creation\" department

Approaching the digital world as a space for \"creation\" is not a
principled stance. It is a way to specify, and thus distinguish, an
approach to art and/or design creation from fields such as innovation,
engineering, \"industrial\" design, R&D, and numerous forms of
digital-related creativity. Indeed, our position as an art school
implies an approach that deviates from the aforementioned logics and
instead encourages practices that invite reflection, critique, and
experimentation. The skills we provide to our students do not correspond
to a specific profession within the digital field, but rather to a
different way of approaching it, one that goes beyond the ideological
prism often associated with the GAFAM (Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon,
Microsoft). In opposition to this ideology, we offer a thinking and an
imaginary that allow us to break free from the solutionist tunnel and
ideally lead to unique creations that are positioned with accuracy.

Hereof, one could say that the idea takes precedence over the project.
Throughout the design process, it is the idea that guides the project
and evolves towards its realization, ultimately leading to the creation
of mock-ups, prototypes, or finished works accompanied by their
technical solutions. However, it may also result in an incomplete
outcome if the design reveals significant problems and deadlocks
(technical, ecological, or ethical). Choosing to abandon a project, as
long as it is justified, can indeed be the best response to a given
issue, especially in the present time, and holds equal pedagogical value
to the skills acquired through a \"finished\" project.

In this sense, the \"creation-based\" approach clearly questions
production through massive automation and standardization, as well as
the normalization of creative forms primarily derived from major names
of contemporary digital world.

This positioning is therefore based on several guiding principles:

-   **Not training for a specific profession in response to market
    trends, but rather cultivating a profile of an artist and/or
    designer with expertise in digital approaches to creation.** These
    young professionals do not simply have a \"digital touch\" within a
    more traditional practice; they are expected to navigate fluidly
    within the ever-changing transformations of the digital world. In
    this regard, it is more about their understanding of processes,
    transformations, and potentials rather than simply adhering to a
    specific technical platform. This approach to digital practice can
    be only attainable at the level of Master's degree (5 years of
    education), considering the fact that the digital landscape at the
    beginning of a student\'s first year is vastly different from what
    they will encounter upon graduation (the current explosion of AI
    being just one example). This kind of digital creator profile
    naturally goes hand in hand with the ability to work collaboratively
    or cooperatively.
-   **In certain cases, adopting the position of a "digital artisan" is
    equal to a design approach that opposes standardized production.** 
    Digital technology, enabled by programming, parametric design, and
    other tools, makes case-by-case creation possible. The digital
    artisan exercises control over adaptation and variations within a
    "computer workshop", utilizing their expertise to make precise
    adjustments based on specific requirements. This proficiency, in
    order to go beyond mere virtuosity, is accompanied by conceptual and
    formal reinvention for each project.
-   **Integrating environmental impact into education.** Recycling,
    reusing, repairing, and considering electronic pollution throughout
    the production process are subjects that need to be taken into
    account. Moreover, in a logic of \"best practices,\" digital
    technology allows us to do less (reducing quantities compared to
    industrial production), and adapt to specific needs while minimizing
    the use of physical or \"dematerialized\" materials. In other words,
    while digital technology facilitates abundance (of images, diverse
    products, storage medium, etc.), if used in an economical and
    thoughtful manner, it can also optimize the limitation of the
    ecological impact of a project.
-   **Encourage students to use FLOSS (Free/Libre and Open Source
    Software) tools such as Blender and Godot as an alternative is not
    merely an economic choice.** Unlike proprietary software, these
    open-source tools are the result of co-designing within the user
    community. With a certain level of programming proficiency, these
    tools can even be directly modified. This shows students that
    software is not something stagnant but it can be adapted and
    reconfigured according to their needs. This initial step leads to
    greater autonomy, which can even extend to creating one\'s own
    tools. Certainly, this freedom requires learning how to code, but
    this investment makes the difference between being a user of digital
    tools and being a digital creator. The goal is not to turn the
    student into a developer, but to provide them with the necessary
    tools to gain greater freedom in manipulating digital materials. The
    \"creation-based\" approach shifts the current focus of digital
    technology, allowing for critical distance and a certain autonomy in
    practice, which is conducive to the development of original
    creators. However, this educational framework also aims to enhance
    the student\'s ability to develop their own \"digital expression\"
    or \"digital language.\"


### What does "digital writing" mean?

Since the 1960s and the irruption of computing in the field of art,
creators and theorists have identified specific characteristics of the
digital world: information discretization/sampling, the ability for
repetition with variations (permutations) unlike mechanical reproduction
systems, hybridization functions, plasticity leading to \"hypermedia,\"
interactivity, generativity, and more. These characteristics highlight
the unique qualities of the digital medium and its potential for
artistic expression and exploration.

These different elements make the digital medium unique and distinctive.
The concept of \"digital expression\" aims to describe an approach in
art or design that specifically utilizes the inherent possibilities of
the digital world, as opposed to other practices that use it primarily
as productivity tools. Developing a \"digital expression\" requires an
understanding that behind every action performed by a computer, there is
code, variables, hardware, and more. It entails adopting a mindset
grounded in the flexibility, impermanence, and constraints of the
digital medium.

To be able to guide the students along this path, autonomy is emphasized
during the learning process. Guided by regular support from teachers,
progress is shaped as projects flourish, rather than being dictated by
hardware and software updates. By developing the ability to cultivate
creative projects that leverage the advantages of digital technology
without seeing them as limitations, students acquire more than just
technical skills that may become obsolete. Instead, they cultivate an
aptitude for seizing opportunities and preparing for the ever-changing
landscape of the digital world.

This ability to perceive the focus of a concept or technique within a
specific context is also acquired though knowledge of art and design
history. This allows for the integration of digital technology into a
broader "history of forms" -- one that extends far beyond the major
players of the contemporary digital world and mostly representing
Western perspectives but also those from other cultural contexts.
Without becoming overwhelming, these references allow us to understand
why, for instance, virtuality and AI have reached their current state
and how these techniques have already been the subject of projects and
artworks that have sparked waves of questioning and critique. This
knowledge prevents a naive approach and allows for a critical distance
from the dazzling promises and technical effects produced by the
competition for \"innovation,\" placing creation and its demands at the
heart of concerns. This cultural acquisition work, in addition to
nurturing sensitivity, is also accompanied by attention to - and even
involvement in - societal and political domains.

During the course of their education years at ESADSE, students can
encounter and experiment with various classes and workshops, including
programming as a tool for artistic research, parametric design,
interaction (installation, virtual spaces, video games, etc.), digital
fabrication, graphic design, digital publishing and web design, live
coding and digital performance, working with data and AI, methodology
and workflow for digital projects (including the documentation process),
and more. This broad foundation opens up possibilities for diverse
digital experiences and, in turn, nourishes an artistic practice that,
in addition to its specific characteristics, also seeks to foster the
uniqueness of each student. The goal is for students to develop their
own digital artistic expression, not conceived as a predetermined formal
or conceptual framework, but rather as an extension of contemporary
issues to be shared freely.

### Conclusion

With "Digital Creation" department and the Digital Research Unit of
ESADSE-ENSBA Lyon, ESADSE covers various aspects of digital technology
throughout its curriculum, from the first to the eighth year, ranging
from introductory to specialized levels and even research-oriented
programs. This pedagogical program enables comprehensive training in
accordance with the orientations described in this text, namely the
\"creation-oriented\" approach and the assertion of a \"digital artistic
expression.\" These two points, as developed here, do not address the
entirety of the initial problematic nor encompass all aspects of digital
education at our school.

The aim of this text, as understood, is not to present ESADSE as an
exemplary model to follow or to impose our approach to various
questionings. The intention is rather to testify - without the desire to
generalize - to a pedagogical experience that seeks to articulate the
field of creative arts with the digital world, addressing its
challenges, particularly in a context where producing less - or even not
at all, in order to preserve the environment - is a fundamental issue.

Thinking and rethinking the formal and conceptual aspects of digital
technology in art and design is a task that can never be completed but
remains fascinating to study, share, and transmit.

**David-Olivier Lartigaud**
