---
layout: page
tags: chapitre

eleventyNavigation:
  key: Encounter between Different Approaches
  order: 3
---

# Encounter between Different Approaches to Digital Art and Design Pedagogies

As stated before, despite being in the same disciplinary field, we have
noticed significant variations in our conceptions of design and working
methodologies. Additionally, our pedagogical approaches differ, as
evident from the feedback received during the first workshop and student
discussions

We thought it was essential as we contemplated proposing a shared vision
of digital pedagogy, to assemble the following three texts. Our
intention was to provide an opportunity for every school representative
to express their perspectives, facilitating a deeper understanding of
our differences, which have played a crucial role in this project.
Additionally, we aimed to emphasize the aspects that unite us.

When collaborating on a project centered around the research object of
collaboration itself, our collective collaboration becomes a case study.
It is crucial not to overlook the differences of opinion and the
tensions they generate. Instead, we must utilize them to comprehend the
complexities inherent in collaborations that transcend individual
perspectives. Throughout our journey, we have consistently observed that
we were looking in different directions. This, perhaps, is the strength
of our project---it explores divergent viewpoints that coexist within
the design world but rarely intersect.

In addition to the three actors involved in this reflection on teaching
digital art and design practices (ESADSE, EKA, and HfG), ESADSE took the
initiative to organize openschool.art meetings to foster a broader
discussion at the national level in France. These meetings, held on the
10th and 11th of May 2022, brought together approximately thirty
teachers and students from various art and design schools across the
country at ESADSE. Building upon this momentum, we envision cultivating
ongoing dialogue and exchanges by establishing an annual meeting,
initially at the local level and eventually expanding to a European
scale. The second edition of openschool.art was successfully held at
ENSAD Paris in March 2023.
